When did you last come in for a physical exam?
I had my last physical two years ago.
Have you had any other exams recently?
Blood work, an EKG or an ultra-sound?
Well, I had a few X-rays at the dentist.
How have you been feeling in general?
No complaints, really.
Could you roll up your left sleeve?
I'd like to take your blood pressure.
120 over 80.
You don't seem to be overweight, that's good.
Do you exercise regularly?
No, not really.
If I run up a flight of stairs, it takes me a while to get my breath back.
I need to get out more.
That would be a good idea.
How about your diet?
I think I eat a pretty balanced diet.
You know, I'll have a hamburger from time to time, but generally, I have well-balanced meals.
Now, I'm going to listen to your heart.
Ooh, that's cold!
Don't worry it's just my stethoscope.
Now, breathe in and hold your breath.
Please pull up your shirt, and breathe deeply.
Everything sounds good.
Let's take a look at your throat.
Please open wide and say 'ah'.
Everything looks ship shape.
I'm going to order some blood work and that's about it.
Take this slip to the front desk and they'll arrange an appointment for the tests.
How long have you been having this pain?
It started in June.
So for more than five months now.
My stomach hurts after some meals, but not always.
You should have come in earlier.
Let's get to the bottom of this.
Have you changed your eating habits during this period?
No, not really.
Well, that's not true.
I'm eating the same foods, but less.
You know, the pain seems to come and go.
How strong is the pain exactly?
On a scale of one to ten, how would you describe the intensity of the pain?
Well, I'd say the pain is about a two on a scale of one to ten.
Like I say, it's not really bad.
It just keeps coming back.
How long does the pain last when you get it?
It comes and goes.
Sometimes, I hardly feel anything.
Other times, it can last up to half an hour or more.
Is there a type of food that seems to cause stronger pain than other types?
Heavy foods like steak or lasagna usually brings it on.
I've been trying to avoid those.
Does the pain travel to any other parts of your body - chest, shoulder or back?
Or does it remain around the stomach area.
No, it just hurts here.
What about if I touch here?
Does it hurt there?
Yes, it hurts there.
What do you think it is doctor?
I'm not sure.
I think we should take some x-rays to find out if you've broken anything.
Will that be expensive?
I don't think so.
Your insurance should cover routine x-rays.
On a scale of one to ten
I think I might have a fever.
It's so cold in here!
Let me check your forehead.
What do you think?
Your temperature seems raised.
Let me get a thermometer to check.
Please put the thermometer under your tongue.
Yes, you have slight temperature.
I think I'll take your blood pressure as well.
Is there anything to worry about?
It's normal to have a bit of fever after an operation like yours!
Yes, I'm so glad everything went well.
You're in good hands here!
Please hold out your arm.
What have you come in for today?
I've been having some pain in my joints, especially the knees.
How long have you been having the pain?
I'd say it started three or four months ago.
It's been getting worse recently.
Are you having any other problems like weakness, fatigue or headaches?
Well I've certainly felt under the weather.
How much physical activity do you get?
Do you play any sports?
I like to play tennis about once a week.
I take my dog on a walk every morning.
Let's have a look.
Can you point to the area where you are having pain?
It hurts right here.
Please stand up and put weight on your knees.
Does this hurt?
How about this?
It seems you have some inflammation in your knees.
However, there's nothing broken.
That's a relief!
Just take some ibuprofen or aspirin and the swelling should go down.
You'll feel better after that.
Which joints are bothering you the most?
How long have you been having this problem?
three or four years
three or four months
three or four weeks
Have a seat.
What have you come in for today?
I'm feeling ill, I've got quite a bad cough, but I don't seem to have a fever.
How long have you had these symptoms?
I've had the cough for two weeks, but feeling ill just these past few days.
Are you having any other problems?
Well, I've got a headache.
I've also had a little bit of diarrhea.
Do you produce any phlegm when coughing?
Sometimes, but it's usually pretty dry.
Do you smoke?
Yes, a few cigarettes a day.
Certainly no more than a half a pack a day.
How about allergies?
Do you have any allergies?
Not that I'm aware of.
Does your head feel stuffy?
Yes, for the past few days.
Now let's have a look.
Could you please open your mouth and say 'ah'?
I'm going to give you a prescription for some medicine to help you get a better night's sleep.
Here, you can get this prescription at any pharmacy.
How often should I take the medicine?
Just take one pill about 30 minutes before you go to bed.
How long should I take them?
The prescription is for thirty days.
If you're not sleeping well after thirty days, I'd like you to come back in.
Is there anything else I can do to help me sleep at night?
Don't worry so much about things at work.
I know, easier said than done.
Should I stay home from work?
No, I don't think that's necessary.
Just remember to stay calm.
How may I help you?
Hello, I'd like to make an appointment to see Doctor Jensen, please.
Have you been in to see Doctor Jensen before?
Yes, I have.
I had a physical last year.
Fine, what is your name?
Thank you Ms Sanchez, let me pull up your file...
Okay, I've located your information.
What's the reason for your making an appointment?
I haven't been feeling very well lately.
Do you need urgent care?
No, not necessarily, but I'd like to see the doctor soon.
Of course, how about next Monday?
There's a slot available at 10 in the morning.
I'm afraid I'm working at 10.
Is there anything available after three?
Let me see.
Not on Monday, but we have a three o'clock opening next Wednesday.
Would you like to come in then?
Yes, next Wednesday at three would be great.
Alright, I'll pencil you in for three o'clock next Wednesday.
Good morning, I'd like to schedule a check-up.
I'd be happy to do that for you.
Have you been to Beautiful Smile before?
Yes, I have.
My last check-up was six months ago.
Can I get your name, please?
Which dentist did you see on your last check-up?
I'm not sure, really.
Let me check your chart...
Dr. Lee has time next Friday in the morning.
Hmmm... that's not good.
I've got work.
How about the week after that?
Yes, Dr. Lee has sometimes open.
Would you like to suggest a time?
Does he have anything open in the afternoon?
Yes, we could fit you in on Thursday, January 14th at 2.30 in the afternoon.
OK, thank you for calling Mr. Appleman, we'll see you next week.
What’s wrong with you?
I have been suffering from fever since yesterday.
Do you have any other symptoms?
I also feel headache and shivering.
Let me take your temperature.
At this time the fever is 102 degree.
Don’t worry, there is nothing serious.
I am giving you the medicine, and you will be all right in couple of days.
But get your blood tested for malaria, and come with the report tomorrow.
I shall recommend at least two days rest for you.
Would you prepare a medical certificate for me to submit it in my office?
This is your medical certificate.
Please tell me how shall I take this medicine?
This medicine is for one day only.
Take this dose as soon as you reach your home and the second at 3 pm and the third at night before sleeping.
What should I eat?
You should eat only light food.
You can take milk and fresh fruit also.
How much shall I pay you?
You can pay consultation fee at the reception desk.
I shall see you tomorrow with my blood report.How are you doing today?
I've been having some gum pain recently.
We'll take a look.
Please recline and open your mouth.... that's good.
How does it look?
There is some inflammation of the gums.
I think we should also do a new set of S-rays.
Why do you say that?
Is something wrong?
No, it's just standard procedure every year.
It looks like you may have a few cavities as well.
That's not good news.
There are just two and they look superficial.
We need to take X-rays to identify tooth decay, as well as check for decay between the teeth.
Put on this protective apron.
Things look good.
I don't see any evidence of further decay.
That's good news!
Yes, I'll just get these two fillings drilled and taken care of and then we'll get your teeth cleaned.
Open your mouth.
I'll be cleaning your teeth today.
Why do I need a cleaning?
We have to make get your teeth and gums clean and disease free.
I guess that makes sense.
Oral health leads to trouble-free teeth.
I'll start off by removing plaque.
Please lean back and open wide.
OK, I hope it's not too bad.
Everybody gets plaque, even if they floss regularly.
That's why it's important to come in twice a year for check-ups.
Please take a drink and rinse.
Now I'll apply some fluoride.
Let me give your teeth a final flossing.
What type of floss tape do you recommend?
Personally, I like the flat tape.
It's easier to get between the teeth.
OK, I'll remember that the next time I buy floss.
How often should I floss?
Twice a day if possible!
Some people like to floss after every meal, but that's not absolutely necessary.
I feel much better.
Have a pleasant day, and remember to floss every day - at least once a day!
I have an appointment with Dr. Peterson at 10.30.
Good morning, can I have your name, please?
Is this the first time you've seen Dr. Peterson?
No, I had my teeth cleaned and checked last year.
OK, just a moment, I'll get your chart.
Have you had any other dental work done during the past year?
No, I haven't.
Have you flossed regularly?
I floss twice a day and use a water-pick.
I see you have a few fillings.
Have you had any trouble with them?
No, I don't think so.
Oh, I changed my insurance.
Here's my new provider card.
Is there anything in particular you'd like the dentist to check today?
I've been having some gum pain recently.
Alright, I'll make a note of that.
I'd like to have my teeth cleaned as well.
Of course, Mr. Waters, that'll be part of today's dental hygiene.
Will I have x-rays taken?
Yes, the dentist likes to take x-rays every year.
However, if you'd prefer not to have x-rays, you can opt out.
I'd like to make sure everything is OK.
Please have a seat and the Dr. Peterson will be with you momentarily.
We'll need to schedule an appointment to come in for the fillings you need?
Do you have any openings next week?
How about next Thursday morning?
I'm afraid I have a meeting.  How about two weeks from today?
Yes, that sounds good.
Can you come at 10 o'clock in the morning?
Perfect, we'll see you on Tuesday, March 10th at 10 o'clock.
How do I raise my bed?
I can't find the controls.
Is that better?
Could I have another pillow?
Certainly, Here you are.
Is there anything else I can do for you?
OK, I'll be right back with the thermometer.
Oh, just a moment.
Can you bring me another bottle of water, too?
Certainly, I'll be back in a moment.
Here's your bottle of water.
