Arthritis can result in damage to the knee ligaments.
We tried that in the past.
How do you prevent it?
It is to be avoided at all costs.
It is impossible to avoid infection 100 percent; and the more complicated the surgery, the higher the risk.
He is in pain every day!
It does have significant risks associated with it.
He is 66 years old and very active.
How long is the recovery time?
What are the most common problems to be expected at this age?
Can there be a second operation?
There aren't enough donors.
Which do you prefer or which do you do more often?
If you lose weight, can you avoid surgery?
Will I limp?
There is no problem waiting, if you can stand it.
Losing weight, if you need to, will help everything.
Is this a medical problem or more likely a mental problem?
It involves a fairly detailed history as well as (sometimes) more in-depth diagnostic testing.
What do you think of this surgery?
The main limitation is cost.
What are the adverse effects to having surgery?
Although rare, these factors may contribute to a stroke.
Make sure that nothing is blocking their airway (mouth, nose).
It mostly depends on the time and cause, but occasionally age can make a difference in treatment options.
What are the best treatment options for a stroke?
It depends on a lot of things.
After about two months, she started having more problems with her right hand and arm, including swelling and unsteadiness.
Pain, loss of sensation, burning, tingling, and numbness may occur.
Is memory loss due to stroke permanent?
He is currently not able to walk.
Instead of sugar, I use a lot of artificial sweeteners.
It sometimes runs in families.
Is stress a factor with strokes, as it is with a heart attack?
Stress is not a proven direct risk factor.
Heat stroke is basically elevated body temperature due to heat and dehydration.
How common is the disease?
Are there certain triggers that cause relapses?
What can we expect from the first visit and the start of treatment?
This past Tuesday was so bad that he couldn't even walk.
I have a question about shortness of breath.
When my son tries to run, he gets very short of breath and says he has trouble breathing, and it really scares him.
Shortness of breath has a variety of causes, including asthma, heartburn, or even anxiety.
So far she shows no symptoms.
Is there anything we should be doing to prevent this?
Special diet?
Exercise program?
Can you help me understand the different treatment options?
My daughter just turned 4.
At first, it seemed the medication was working.
Unfortunately, it hasn't had the effect we had hoped for.
What causes this and what can we do to help it?
What else can be done to help reduce his pain?
My daughter is having a very hard time.
Do this for 15 minutes, three times a day.
Is it usually just the first few years?
People's symptoms vary, even between family members.
What can I do to lessen this?
The intensity varies from time to time, but never goes away.
I feel cold but as soon as I cover up I am sweating.
What can I do to get a good night’s sleep?
I’m also feeling tired.
Is it safe for me to take this?
I have had my uterus removed, but not my ovaries.
Am I at high risk for breast cancer?
I have had some joint pain as well.
Is this safe?
Just a couple drops of clear liquid.
I take no medications at all.
As the disease worsens, it may become difficult to carry out any activities.
However, there are several other diseases that cause these same symptoms.
The rate of disease progression can be variable.
Do these medications lose their effectiveness after taking them for a period of time?
However, I will try and address some of your concerns.
There are several reasons why this might occur.
What can we do to prevent him from having an attack?
I was diagnosed with asthma, but I have no wheezing or coughing.
My chest gets tight and uncomfortable, and I am short of breath.
I thought I was going to have an asthma attack last week.
Asthma is really a condition that has no cure.
Asthma has many triggers and these can change over time.
And definitely, stress can make asthma worse.
At his last chest X-ray, it was noticed that there was a rippling in the left lung.
If there is an area of prior inflammation, or an area where there might have been an infection in the past, there can be a small leftover effect on the chest X-ray.
My asthma is getting more severe.
There are multiple medications available to gain control of your asthma, and it is very important that you do that.
Does cold (temperature) aggravate asthma?
Covering your mouth and nose during exercise or when outside during cold weather may be helpful.
How serious is the procedure and what does it really do?
Do I need to stop it while I am pregnant?
I am worried about getting these injections.
As with any treatment, there are risks and benefits.
I’m 25 years old and have asthma, I’m about 5'8 weigh 135.
These are very different types of tumors.
It is probably best to have a healthy diet, to minimize or avoid alcohol, etc.
What can I do?
Surgery is often an option at the time of tumor recurrence or progression.
It depends on the type of tumor.
It might be good, it might be bad.
He took two months to recover.
She now has an MRI every three months.
Are there other tests that should be run?
I get severe earaches from my cell phone, even after only a minute or two.
As I get older, it takes longer for my eyes to focus from near to far or far to near.
Is this normal?
This is not uncommon.
It is a condition that is caused by a decrease in blood flow to the brain.
My child often gets dizzy and lightheaded.
When this happens, I just give him something to eat.
Are there any other signs we should look for?
Will he die if he has another attack?
Some people may experience weight loss, although some patients have weight gain.
I've been experiencing frozen ankles/toes for almost a year now.
It may be that you might require additional medication to see if this improves.
Am I already past the preliminary stage?
There is a slightly higher risk.
I know I need medication for this, but I need to be able to focus and be sharp at work.
What type of medication is best for this issue?
There are not a lot of options with medications.
Stress will make the symptoms appear worse for a time.
Do you recommend any specific exercises to reduce symptoms?
What causes this disease to take over the body?
What are the most common headache triggers?
How would you know the difference?
It is rare, but it can occur.
Is there anything that can be done?
Is there an explanation for this change?
I did not add or change medications during this time.
It depends on the situation.
What can give me some relief?
Are there any long-term effects I should be worried about with taking these?
My migraines come about two days before menstruation and last about three to four days.
Many times, it can occur without any reason.
What symptoms would indicate a problem?
I had high blood pressure, but no longer do since I have been exercising regularly and drinking more water.
Blood tests should be done two to three months later, and the dose can be adjusted based on the results.
I have occasional severe fatigue symptoms and depression.
There are many causes of fatigue.
Vitamin D deficiency often causes fatigue.
Calcium supplements usually don't cause stomach discomfort.
I did break ribs about 10 years ago.
I am somewhat concerned with the hip.
What are the symptoms of a concussion?
More than likely, symptoms will occur within minutes.
Symptoms can change days later and others can develop.
Does a severe headache usually occur with a concussion?
He still has headaches.
How long should headaches last?
Typically, symptoms of a concussion last about 6 to 10 days.
Symptoms need to be monitored closely.
Can this have an effect on them later in life?
Is there any way to prevent it?
How do you make your neck stronger?
There are some exercises that can be dedicated to neck strength.
How is it treated?
There are a number of potential causes, none of them particularly serious.
Try exercise first.
How long does it take?
How long do I need to take off from work?
Exercise is good for overall heath.
Will it get less effective when frequently used?
What should I see as the result of using this medicine?
There are plenty of treatment options.
What else can I do?
Can it be something else?
Actually, it depends entirely on the aggressiveness of the cancer.
What should we expect for him at this point?
I am 19 and have a ‘lump’ on my left testicle.
How is this disease diagnosed and what causes it?
I have been cancer-free for about a year now.
Prostate cancer is not linked to testis cancer.
I have soreness on one shoulder when I sleep on that side, or with certain movements -- never sharp pain.
It hasn't improved after three weeks.
What are the next steps for me?
I would consider this as the next step if you are trying to avoid surgery.
My elbow improved within a few short weeks.
It takes about three to four weeks for it to go back to normal.
I now have troubles with my shoulder.
It gets very stiff, is uncomfortable when I try to sleep, does not have the same strength, and some of my activities are restricted.
I have tendonitis inside my right elbow.
Ice, heat, rest do not seem to help.
The condition has lasted six months.
They helped somewhat for a limited period of time.
Then things seemed to be getting a little worse.
I still have quite a bit of pain at times and a loss of function.
Can you please explain what this would entail?
My son has complained of his elbow hurting him lately.
It is only his right arm.
I have tingling/pain in my hand.
What can I do at bedtime to keep this from happening?
Progress is very slow.
Is this a safe level for someone my age?
What should be next step?
At what point do I need to take further action?
No symptoms other than fatigue.
I was diagnosed with prostate cancer last month.
There is a very low chance of a serious infection.
I am a very healthy 61-year-old male and have been through several medications.
This sometimes occurs with epilepsy surgery.
He has short-term memory problems and forgot to take his medications.
The surgery was three years ago.
It has progressively gotten worse.
She continues to have seizures.
How much of a problem is this?
Will it continue to decrease?
If it’s stable, there’s no need to change your treatment.
If it continues to decrease, you would have to change to another medication.
I did not have any headaches.
How can you increase success rates?
My husband has passed all his tests.
What are my options for getting pregnant again?
Treatment may relieve pain and improve fertility.
It is given daily by mouth for five days.
It is recommended that alcohol and caffeine be limited.