What are the symptoms of lung cancer?
They are common symptoms that can be present for many reasons.
More specific lung cancer symptoms include coughing up blood, chest pain, and weight loss.
Coughing can be really bad with lots of mucus.
Treatment of the infection may help.
Fatigue is a major issue.
Do you have any recommendations for relieving fatigue during this time?
Coughing up blood is a concerning symptom.
What are the pros and cons?
My mother's lung cancer has come back.
Three very small spots were found.
What is this and does it really work?
The most common side effects are skin rash and diarrhea.
Lung cancer is definitely related to smoking.
This is not very common, but certainly happens.
The risks would depend on the stage of the cancer.
There is no cure – only treatment.
There may be no symptoms at all.
Can I still drink alcohol?
It is very important to consume protein.
I am losing weight and have a loss of appetite.
Your body is attempting to heal and this will take time.
She's doing better finally.
Hair loss can happen for multiple reasons.
Most often a benign cause is found.
I have never had this problem before.
I have pain in my lower back.
What effects does birth control have on young women?
Periodically, I have quite a bit of pain with it.
It is very stiff and sore at times.
I recently broke all the bones in my right ankle.
What precautions should I be taking?
Is shortness of breath a symptom?
Would a transplant be an option for her?
My mother was diagnosed with lung cancer.
His CT scans have come out clean -- no sign of any tumors.
His white blood cell count is low.
The cancer is small and is in only one place.
I smoked for 10 years before quitting five years ago.
How long a surgery is it?
A good quality CT scan is usually the initial first test.
What are the chances?
A couple of months ago, I had an accident and ended up with a concussion.
I have been suffering from loss of bowel control.
Is this a recent occurrence?
How can I stop this from happening?
When I go to the bathroom, I almost always have to urinate again within about 10 minutes.
I have three children that were born naturally.
I have been told that pregnancy can cause this.
I have had it for about three years.
Are there exercises that can help?
Take fiber and drink plenty of water on a daily basis.
There has been no bleeding.
It is not painful, just a feeling like there is something there.
I have had a biopsy that was negative.
Our antibody tests were negative.
Classic medical problems like diabetes have been ruled out.
I have been experiencing shooting pains in my legs along with some numbness.
Is it pain in the back or legs that bothers you?
I had the surgery about a year ago.
So far, I am living with the pain.
The spine shows wear and tear as we age.
I mostly feel it when I work out, but sometimes it comes on even when it's not provoked by a workout.
It's hard to walk and put weight on my left side.
I just got back from a trip and the pain is worse.
Can I do something more?
I have a lot of trouble standing for any length of time.
I have multiple back problems.
I have had back pain for many years.
I've tried therapy shots and medicines.
It does not work.
Can surgery help for my back problems?
I had lower leg pain and stiffness.
I have lower back disk pain.
Exercise is one very important aspect of managing chronic back pain.
These pains come and go and are on the left side of my head.
I have had neck pain on my right side for nine months.
He tried steroids, but it didn't help.
He gave me steroids again, but they do not help.
He put me on a muscle relaxer at night, but it hasn't helped.
I have arthritis in my neck.
The pain goes away when I rub muscle very hard on the back of my neck.
Sometimes I have pain in the ear area.
Sometimes it hurts when I turn over in bed.
It feels like I have a cold on that side of head.
I am freezing all of the time.
My skin is very dry.
What is the chance it may be cancer?
Can you tell me how long this will last?
She is now experiencing joint and socket pain.
That could explain some of the symptoms.
No ointment will decrease it.
You can massage it, but the body will heal itself.
There is no fixed dose that fits all.
I have had open heart surgery.
Does the cataract have to be removed first?
The decision to treat must be made promptly.
Is there anything that can be done at this point?
Usually, they will heal in a day or two.
The risks of the surgery might outweigh the benefits.
I am still in a lot of pain.
Can this hurt her eyes?
The risk of cancer returning depends on the stage of the tumor.
Symptoms include pain with urination, burning, and a feeling like you have to urinate frequently and urgently.
Symptoms of this usually include fever, chills, nausea, and back pain.
Could this be a sign of a kidney problem?
I had surgery for kidney cancer about 8 months ago and still have pain in that side.
Blood tests show that my liver is healthy.
X-ray shows that my lungs are normal.
This is also on my right side.
Otherwise, I am healthy.
This is a very serious condition that can be life-threatening.
The x-ray did not find any stone or UTI.
I have little pain on the left side.
You need to watch the amount of sodium in your diet if you have high blood pressure.
Should I wait until ten years?
They can only be diagnosed by biopsy.
They need specific treatment.
Has anything been found?
Both alcohol and red meat in moderation are fine.
Plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, fish and white meat.
Is this type of pain indicative of a kidney stone?
How long does this typically take?
I have had a few kidney stones.
Does alcohol consumption have anything to do with kidney stones?
I would encourage you to have your vitamin D deficiency treated.
It is important to check a PTH level to make certain this is not the cause.
Kidney stones and UTIs can be linked.
How long does it usually take to pass a kidney stone?
Does it depend on the size?
I often have pain on the tops of my feet, particularly first thing in the morning.
I continue to have pain in that ankle, especially when exercising or walking distances.
I now have a lot of pain in my feet and toes.
I am very limited in how far or much I can walk.
I have a fractured left ankle that is now arthritic and sometimes painful.
Is it too late for me?
It should be tested and confirmed, and the underlying disorder treated.
The slight burning sensation is there.
I don’t feel any discomfort when I walk around.
This started suddenly.
