Are there things that can be done to reduce the symptoms without using medication?
It is important to control risk factors early on.
People with diabetes have an increased risk of developing heart disease at some point in their lives.
Can it be repaired?
Did you have heart attacks?
The best way to prevent the progression of pre-diabetes to diabetes is by diet and exercise, decreasing the carbohydrates, simple sugars, and fat in your diet.
If the bad cholesterol, also called the LDL cholesterol, is high (>100), you should be started on a statin drug.
I have high cholesterol and high blood pressure, both controlled with medication.
My father had heart disease and diabetes, and eventually died of a stroke at age 67.
My exercise regime and diet are good.
With the family history of diabetes, you should be periodically checked for diabetes.
Continue the good work with the diet and exercise.
I am worried.
Is someone with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes more at risk for heart disease, or is there no difference?
My mom has diabetes and had heart surgery last December.
She is not overweight and is on cholesterol medications.
What steps should she take?
She does eat a low fat diet.
Are there certain medications she definitely should be on?
My father had a heart attack about a month ago that was caused by his diabetes.
I was in the hospital for heart surgery and was on oral medications for diabetes, but now they have me on insulin.
Is that normal?
How long will it be before my sugars are back to normal?
Probably 10 a day is good.
My mom has congestive heart failure.
She also has Type 2 diabetes and is on insulin.
Her sugars are getting better.
She should exercise.
I am 45 years old and have diabetes.
Lately I have been having some numbness in my left hand and then a little pressure in my chest, but I have no other risk factors of heart disease.
Could it be my heart?
I am in my 40s, never smoked, active throughout life.
I have started having insomnia and fatigue.
The disease can appear suddenly and then disappear, or it can develop gradually and produce symptoms that come and go for a lifetime.
Most often, the tissue is obtained from the lungs.
The diagnostic test for this disorder is usually tissue biopsy.
Are there additional tests that should be run?
I have a healthy diet.
It cleared up my lungs.
Allergies are the body's incorrect response to a foreign substance.
Can allergies become progressively worse?
That's great, but it doesn't mean that he doesn't need ongoing therapy for asthma.
The recommendations for this level of asthma are that patients receive daily controller therapy -- usually low-dose inhaled steroids.
When she runs she complains of breathing difficulty and pain in her neck.
What signs should I be looking for?
Why would she complain of pain in her neck?
He has also had a few more minor attacks.
What causes him to have these attacks when sick, and will this be a problem that he has to deal with for the rest of his life?
Can it get worse?
What are their side effects?
It is not very effective.
What else can we try?
You should discuss other measures with your pediatrician.
All can be effective for many people with allergies.
It should be the same dosage and potency.
This also depends on genetics.
They can accelerate the onset of symptoms.
My daughter has been coughing a lot the past month or so.
Her pediatrician says it's just a cold, but it seems to be getting worse.
What should I look for to be sure it isn't anything more serious?
Unfortunately, her symptoms may just represent "back-to-back" viral infections.
These infections have been causing prolonged symptoms.
In any case, however, a month of symptoms probably deserves a chest X-Ray, careful re-exam, and further discussion with your pediatrician.
I usually feel that viral "cold" symptoms should last fewer than seven days.
How does one differentiate between allergies and just a cold?
Allergies usually include sneezing, runny nose, eye itching and redness.
Cold symptoms usually resolve with the decrease in runny nose within a week.
Is there any connection?
Is there anything you should or should not eat while pregnant that can help prevent allergies in children?
If you have specific food allergies, it would be advisable to avoid them.
Avoidance is the best strategy.
Obesity is one of the most important factors for the development of type 2 diabetes.
Will my diabetes go away permanently, or is this fix only temporary?
Your diabetes will definitely improve, but it’s not certain if your diabetes will be cured.
Is this a serious issue?
It is a marker of the average blood sugar in the body for the last three months.
What types of things makes a person more likely to develop type 2 diabetes?
How serious is it of a risk?
I did not know this was possible and I don't quite understand it.
How dangerous is this and how is it treated?
Weight loss improves insulin sensitivity and can make your pancreas work again.
If I have diabetes, can I still go on a diet?
Sugar substitutes give me headaches.
What is the recovery time after surgery?
Most patients spend two to three days in the hospital, and then need about two to three weeks afterward to fully recover and return to work.
Yes, you need to follow my recommendation regarding your diet, exercise and vitamins and supplements.
Even a small amount of alcohol may have harmful effects.
Are there limitations to taking certain medications after surgery?
That depends on what procedure you had.
I have type 2 diabetes.
It is recommended that those with diabetes are checked regularly for kidney complications, as diagnosis and treatment are essential to preventing progression of kidney problems.
Diabetes will cause nonhealing open ulcers, nerve pain, blindness, kidney damage and other complication as a result of high blood sugar.
Your blood creatinine, urea and urine tests are normal.
If your blood and urine tests are normal, I would advise you to continue to periodically check these tests to monitor for any changes in kidney function.
If I was diagnosed as diabetic five years ago, how do I know whether the disease is progressing in a rapid way, or is under control?
Would I feel differently if my diabetes disease is under control, compared to not under control?
If you had normal sugar levels and suddenly begin to have high or low sugars, you will feel it.
You may feel tired, foggy, going to the bathroom frequently, etc.
Does diabetes always lead to kidney disease?
Long-standing diabetes, especially if poorly controlled, can affect the kidneys.
Additionally, having high blood pressure increases this risk.
You should have blood and urine tests done periodically to assess for protein in the urine and to check your kidney function.
You should focus on lifestyle changes including weight loss, avoidance of smoking, good control of blood sugars and blood pressure, and cholesterol management.
As your blood sugar and blood pressure increase, the small vessels that feed your kidney get hit and cannot work properly.
This is a warning for you to start taking care of your sugar and blood pressure well.
There are many things you could do.
With all the above, you will absolutely be able to protect your kidneys, although there might be still a small risk left to develop kidney disease no matter what you do.
Can you prevent it completely?
You may not feel any different.
Protein is one of the first clues telling us about the start of possible damage in your kidney.
Both type 1 and type 2 diabetics can get kidney disease.
My pulse is usually around 90—isn’t that too high?
What medications do I take to treat kidney disease?
A likely cause of shortness of breath in this case is exercised-induced asthma.
I was diagnosed with scoliosis at 15 years old.
I have never had any issues or concerns about my curved spine until this past year.
I started having some back pain in my left hip and tingling in my right shoulder.
I continue to do my exercises and walk one to two miles daily.
What is causing this severe leg pain?
This can lead to pressure on nerve roots causing pain in the leg.
There is nothing short of further surgery that can treat that.
This makes standing upright more difficult and more painful.
My daughter was diagnosed with scoliosis two years ago.
Are there any nonsurgical methods to help prevent it from getting worse?
There is very little that can be done to prevent progression if it is going to occur.
However, there are things that will accelerate progression and increase the risk of needing surgery at a later stage.
I have coped with this for 45 years.
Would swimming be a more appropriate exercise than daily walking?
My vertebrae seem to crack a lot.
In general most people remain stable for many years as is evident in your case.
Any core strengthening exercise is good.
My left hip is higher than the other and my left leg is longer.
I stretch it throughout the day.
What should I be doing?
Unfortunately, this would be extremely difficult.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of each?
They may or may not be helpful for your son.
It is safer to do so.
It may go away on its own, or may simply persist as lung inflammation without much scarring for years.
Anything higher than 80 percent is considered normal.
When the infections aren’t treated with antibiotics, these infections typically go into the lungs.
However, there are still cases where a surgical lung biopsy is needed.
I always have a lot of mucus in my throat.
Can that be caused by ILD?
Some types of ILD may cause very large amount of mucus secretion in the airways.
In that case, you may have quite a bit of progression.
Some days I feel great and think I could go for another 10 years.
Other days, I am very lethargic and not nearly optimistic.
In general, this issue occurs in less than 10 percent of people on these medications, and is the reason why periodic blood work monitoring is necessary.
However, having low blood cell counts due to one medication does not necessarily mean that another medication would cause the same issue.
If so, why can it not be applied to lungs?
As with any procedure, the surgery leads to added injury and subsequent healing in the proper manner.
Unfortunately, if the lungs are injured, this leads to gas exchange issues that can be detrimental to life.
With regards to medical management, there is no currently available medicine to dissolve scars.
Steroids should not be used to treat IPF.
So, we usually look for other options.
Side effects included gastrointestinal upset.
Supplemental oxygen is usually given when the oxygen level is low.
This would be a significant strain on your heart.
Avoiding the source of these allergens would not only help slow down but may even improve lung function .
Try to get though a total of 60 minutes every day!
You still need pelvic exams.
They are not addictive.
But lately I have been having symptoms like I was going through it again.
Estrogen is good for hair and skin.
How do I know what's normal and what's not?
As far as depression goes, how do I differentiate between menopausal or other?
Depression is not a sign of menopause.
If you are depressed, there are several effective therapies.
Can constant daily headaches be due to menopause.
I stay in a fog day and night and feel off balance.
So are antidepressants needed for the crying?
When should I get tested for osteoporosis?
Each body movement requires a series of interactions between the brain, spinal cord, nerves and muscles.
I have issues when trying to use certain muscles (like standing up and starting to walk).
Are reflexes always affected?
Some movements are more concerning than others.
You are correct, they are overlapping and the diagnosis can be tricky.
I understand that there is no cure.
It is uncontrollable and the only time it goes away is during sleep.
In general, we are able to decrease the medications by 25-50%.
In some rare patients, we are able to discontinue the medications entirely.
In others there may be no change at all.
Medication adjustment and decrease in dose is more of a reaction (in trying to balance the stimulation and the medication) and not a goal.
Is this something that you do often?
What would some ‘warning signs’ be?
If so, how much improvement can we expect?
They hurt quite a bit.
Sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't.
There are lots of other medications you can try.
They can only be suppressed momentarily, and they can be disabling.
It is very variable.
Over the past six years I have experienced progressive weakness/numbness in my legs.
I am normally very active, but this is dramatically impacting my life.
Once that happens, blood flow improves, and chemicals that can irritate the tissue are diminished.
How many types of therapy are there?
There can be some soreness for a day or two.
Usually, the risks are minimal, such as a little soreness.
It depends on how long the problem has existed.
One adjustment will not fix these problems.
The resolution could take weeks or months.
He still suffers lingering back pain and neck pain.Physical therapy should also be considered.This is more of a physical therapy issue and would involve more stretching, if it is just a muscle tightness issue.
They either don't work or the side effects are worse than dealing with the pain.
I seem to have different areas from my neck down to my butt bone that hurt.
My lower back hurts when walking no matter what type of shoes I wear.
Can this cause hip, calf, and foot pain?
I have had lower back pain and sciatica for years.
Recently, the leg pain has gone away and moved into my groin and pelvic area.
Does this mean the sciatica is getting worse, and should I be concerned?
Sciatica can cause buttock or pelvic pain.
But if the pain has moved out of the leg, that is indicating improvement.
It depends on the cause.
Physical therapy exercises are frequently done that may help.
I have pain in my lower back.
I have done both and one year later it helps.
I still go for a minor adjustment about twice a year.
The pillow may keep the spine balanced without any curve during the sleeping hours.
The two most common forms of arthritis - osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis - both cause joint pain and limit movement.
Osteoarthritis results from wear-and-tear on the cartilage that cushions the joints, typically after an injury or with advancing age.
Rheumatoid arthritis is less common and is an autoimmune disease.
Is it due to inflammation caused in part by our bodies being too acidic?
Inflammation may play a role in osteoarthritis.
I recently had a hip replacement.
I would like to avoid further issues with my knees, too.
At this point, I have severe pain when I have to step up or down or even bend my knees to sit on the commode.
I am OK walking on a flat surface.
I do not want to do this.
Two years ago I fell and broke my wrist.
Despite physical therapy and doing my exercises regularly, I still have pain every day.
What other options beside surgery might be available to me?
Physical therapy can help both.
It hasn't bothered me until recently.
They didn't help much.
Is there anything else I can try?
Surgery is the last resort in my opinion.
If there is active swelling, redness, and pain, it might be useful to try an injection.
When I exercise or walk a lot, the next day my knees are very swollen.
What kind of exercise would you recommend to help lessen the swelling?
Also, is there anything I can do to decrease the swelling?
Weight loss is also helpful.
Are there any long-term use considerations I should be aware of?
Can you help me understand the potential benefits from taking these supplements?
I strongly feel like I am feeling an improvement for the first time in two years.
Could I take blood pressure medication at the same time?
When will I feel a difference?
It can take a few doses to feel the effects of treatment.
I hope you will feel better soon.
If it works for you, I think you should continue it.
If it does not help, you don't necessarily need to continue.
Could it be due to medication side- effects?
Is there any specific diet?
How long is the recovery time?
I have had this condition for more than 10 years.
It then becomes so sore that I cannot sit comfortably for a day or two.
I find that all I can do is stand or sit for short periods or lie in bed all day.
Are all of these procedures really necessary?
If you have a family member with stones you are at a higher risk for stones.
What are the symptoms of kidney stones?
Kidney stones cause pain when they start to move.
Medications may be helpful.
The risk of kidney stones can be decreased significantly, but not eliminated.
This is the case in 70 percent to 80 percent of patients.
How long should I expect to see blood in my urine?
If you see bright red blood or clots, that would be cause for concern.
It is very uncomfortable.
Is it necessary or can I request to have it removed?
We would look at your CT scan.
Are there any foods I should be sure to include in my diet?
I just found out that I am pregnant.
Wouldn't limiting my calcium intake be bad for the baby?
Can chronic pain in the testis derive from kidney stones?
A stone in the ureter can cause referred pain to the testicle.
However, this should not be the cause of chronic testicular pain.
If a CT scan did not show a stone in your ureter, then the pain in the testicle is not being caused by a stone.
I have had several kidney stones.
What else could cause this pain?
How much water should I drink to prevent the onset of kidney stones?
I now have a constant urge to use the restroom.
I have to have cataract surgery on my left eye.
I am nearsighted and have astigmatism.
Can my nearsightedness and astigmatism be corrected at the same time as my cataract?
Surgery is the only treatment for cataracts.
I have had them for a couple of years now.
There are risk factors that you can control.
I have had conjunctivitis a few times in the past year.
Only the bacterial form is treated with antibiotics.
I have had astigmatism since an early age.
Otherwise, my vision is fine.
There is no pain with the episodes.
It is in just in my left eye.
I have a lot of physical symptoms: tremor, weight loss, and severe anxiety.
My eyes swell and are very painful, and my vision is getting very bad.
All symptoms seem to come and go.  I'll feel good for a week then sick for a week.
I also have severe muscle pain.
Should I be concerned about this?
Is there something I can do to fix this?
What other options are there?
Are there any vitamins or supplements to help vision?
Should I be concerned about losing my vision in the future?
When I wake up at night, I cannot see (for a few seconds).
Everything is blurred, and I also feel pain in my eyes.
After blinking a few times, then I can see.
How risky is it?
I have a family history of glaucoma.
It is definitely worth having an eye exam to check your eye pressure and optic nerves.
I am using saline currently.
I have a bad eye irritation reaction to all.
How does type 2 diabetes affect laser surgery?
Both are equally safe and effective.
When I come in from the outdoors, I have difficulty seeing for several minutes.
That symptom may not be related to your cataract surgery.
I had my first baby two months ago.
Therefore, it may require another biopsy.
Sometimes I feel like my throat is tight.
I have no difficulty swallowing, and I can breathe just fine, but I still feel tight.
Only the biopsy can tell us if it is cancer or not.
If I take more calcium, I get severe neck pain.
Your TSH should be kept low.
What is the normal range for TSH?
My symptoms have worsened.
What symptoms do you have?
Is it stress?
I normally eat fresh fruits and veggies, and I try to limit eating out.
There are other causes.
Is any follow-up necessary?
I am allergic to all seafood, so I can't eat it.
I have trouble staying asleep at night.
I feel very cold in winter and hot and sweaty in the summer.
This is not normal for me.
What can I do?
Also, consider the position your head and neck are in.
Fatigue is a common symptom.
I have had imbalance issues for six months.
What can I do to not feel this way anymore?
Will it ever go away?
Symptoms can vary, but in general include dizziness and imbalance.
These can be constant or intermittent.
If problems are present in these areas, it can also contribute to your symptoms.
Is it more helpful with mild or severe symptoms?
They seem to provide no benefit.
Is there a relation between the two?
When does it work the best?
Is there some place where I can get information on this?
What are the advantages?
How long will I have to wait for surgery?
What are the risks of surgery?
Will I have a visible scar?
It takes approximately two to three hours.
All I know is that my hearing keeps getting worse.
The sooner you address the problem, the better.
But, there could be other causes to the problem you describe.
How long will it take?
Usually it happens after a cold, but not always.
I had a difficult time recovering from surgery.
Am I doing damage to my vocal cords?
I thought I would outgrow this in my adult life.
Is there any way to correct this?
I am prone to several cold and flu bugs each year.
If you have frequent sore throats, you should look into it.
I often struggle with my voice the next day.
Should I drink more water?
And will drinking hot liquids hurt or help?
Maintaining good hydration is usually good for health.
I have read that running is bad, because of the way you breathe, and swimming is a better activity.
In general, if your bone density is low and declining, I personally would consider having a blood test done to determine if the amount of vitamin D you are taking is enough.
There are potential side effects with any medication.
I am not sure I did the right thing.
Like all medicines, they should be used cautiously.
I have been doing it for several years now.
The best way to get your daily recommended amount of calcium is through your diet.
If you can't or don't like this, I recommend supplements to make up the difference.
Otherwise, I'm in excellent health.
What is the best source?
There are many sources of calcium.
What else can I do to help my bones?
We usually also need a medication to help balance the cells that are removing and building bone.
I am always concerned about hurting my back.
Obesity is one of the most important factors for the development of type 2 diabetes.
What are the main symptoms of Type 2 Diabetes?
What is this surgery?
I have additional health issues other than diabetes.
The medications I take all have the side-effect of weight gain.
Can I lose more weight by having the surgery?
I often find myself tired and short of breath, and I really don't sleep well.
There may be other reasons for these symptoms that we can pursue before surgery.
I have diabetes and am overweight.
I also have high blood pressure.
Why does this happen, and how can I prevent it from developing?
I find it difficult to lose weight through diet and exercise.
It happens because, as your weight goes up, your body uses insulin less effectively (insulin resistance), and that leads to high glucose levels.
The only effective way to reverse insulin resistance is weight loss.
Unfortunately, many diabetes medications can cause weight gain.
How long will it take for my diabetes to resolve?
I thought once you have diabetes you always have it.
Can it come back?
Also, as weight loss occurs, insulin resistance improves, so that more than 80% of type 2 diabetics will be off their medication with normal glucose levels around one year after surgery.
It is important to avoid junk food and to incorporate exercise into your routine.
Most people are back to normal activity within one week.
I have sitting pain that used to be just a nuisance, but now is so bad I cannot sit for even 5 minutes.
What could be causing such a bad pain?
Again, the first course of action would be to determine the cause of the pain.
I have pain every time I have intercourse.
What could be causing this pain?
Is there medication for this or some other treatment option?
What could cause this in someone of this age?
Something more severe would probably be pain that came and was constant, and was not related to your period.
It’s worth a try.
I have three children.
The first two were born naturally and the third by cesarean.
I now have some incontinence, but mostly very frequent urination.
I have been told that pregnancy can cause this.
I know that therapy can help with the incontinence, but can it also help with the frequent urination?
Pregnancy does cause frequent urination, but it should end when the child is born.
If you are, then it’s best not to do it.
I have pain in my groin area that has been getting worse since my surgery for an ovarian cyst last year.
It is so bad now that I cannot even carry my purse.
Could this pain be related?
She had a hysterectomy about a year ago.
My mother has chronic pelvic pain.
The pain could be related to the hysterectomy, but could potentially be caused by other factors.
I guess I just don't know where to start.
You want to try to tighten and lift this area inward.
They do not seem to help at all.
It depends on age.
I am a 14-year-old girl with epilepsy, and I think I am suffering from some kind of depression.
Is this normal?
I've had epilepsy since age 3.
I am now 20 years old and seizure-free.
I've been reducing my seizure medications over the last several months.
Is not the same with all of the medications.
Is it controlling the seizures well?
If it isn’t, then maybe looking for another medication might help.
It depends where the seizure is coming from.
I have had epilepsy for almost 35 years.
How do I identify the differences?
I am on medication for seizures.
You are already receiving treatment for this.
I believe therapy is really helpful.
Is it possible this has been the issue all along?
Do you have any advice?
I smoked for about 25 years, but I quit eight years ago.
Could it be cancer or am I overreacting?
What would be an indicator that my cancer has returned?
That is why the importance of early detection is stressed.
I have been diagnosed with cancer in my nasal cavity and would like to get a second opinion.
My wife finished radiation treatments about a month ago.
Since then her doctor has done two CT scans that show no new tumor growth.
Head and neck cancers are generally very aggressive tumors.
The primary treatment methods however, continue to be surgery or radiation.
Why is this, and is there anything new in the way of treatment or prevention?
This typically indicates an advanced stage cancer that is very aggressive being unresponsive to treatments.
Is it sudden or gradual?
It makes sounds muffled and hard to hear.
There is also some ringing.
I have irregular periods.
So far, all have come back normal.
Birth control pills do not lead to infertility.
Fertility is fully restored once the pills are discontinued.
I have been using birth control pills for more than 10 years.
I would like to get pregnant, and I am concerned that being on the pill this long may interfere with my chances of getting pregnant.
How can you determine the cause of infertility?
It is given daily by mouth for five days.
And I'm having no success with pregnancy.
What do you recommend?
The most important factor is your age.
I have gone through all the tests to see why I am not able to get pregnant.
How long does the procedure take?
Am I awake for the procedure?
What are you looking for?
What are the signs of colon cancer?
Are they dangerous?
If we find nothing, or even a couple of tiny harmless polyps, then that is it for now.
The kidney damage can lead to a need for transplant.
Is this something that needs continual treatment?
I am 53 and going through menopause.
I never experienced a panic attack until menopause.
I am desperate to find a way to reduce these reactions.
I have been diagnosed with depression.
I have been on various anti-depressants.
I am running out of options where I don't have side effects.
What are some other treatment options besides medications that have been helpful with young adults?
When at its worse, my stress levels are very high.
I have been on medication for 45 years.
Is there a method I could use that will help?
What are the symptoms of bladder cancer?
This exposure lasted for about two years.
Last November, I had a low-grade tumor stage 1 removed.
Every three months for three years and then six months for two more?
Most common is every three months for two years, then every six months for two years, then once a year, probably for life.
What testing is available to check for bladder cancer?
Shouldn't I be getting an MRI?
If it is positive, I would consider a bladder biopsy.
If it is negative, then the likelihood of cancer is very low.
Is this something that should be followed up?
What other steps do you recommend?
All have been negative.
Do you suggest any supplements?
How do I manage the pain?
I don't think it is working.
Careful follow-up is of course in order.
Three months all clear.
What typical symptoms will one experience as the disease progresses?
Now I am having symptoms of UTIs but the urine tests are negative.
If so, what is your recommendation regarding this procedure?
There is no risk to either partner by sexual activity in people who have cancer.
Is there a link between these two?
Should this be a concern?
This should be investigated.
