A caesarean section is an operation where the doctor cuts an opening in the abdomen and womb and removes the baby through it.
You need a caesarean section because...
Your baby is the wrong way around.
Your baby is very big.
The placenta is covering the mouth of the womb.
You are having twins.
You have had a caesarean section before.
Your baby is taking too long to come out.
We are worried about your health.
Your baby is not getting enough oxygen and needs to come out quickly.
The operation will be done under epidural.
This means that the doctor will put a needle in your back to make the lower part of your body go to sleep.
You will feel the doctor pushing and pulling, but you will not feel any pain.
If you feel pain, you must tell the doctor.
For this operation, we will put you to sleep.
There are some risks to having a caesarean section.
You may bleed a lot.
If you bleed too much, can we give you blood?
If you bleed too much and we cannot stop the bleeding, we may need to cut out the womb to save your life.
This happens very rarely.
You may develop an infection.
If you do develop an infection, we will treat it with antibiotics.
The bladder or bowel may be damaged during the operation.
There will be a scar.
After the operation you will need to stay in hospital for a few days so that we can see that there isn't any problems.
Do you want to have a caesarean section?
Please sign here.
We would like to do an investigation called a gastroscopy.
This involves putting a thin pipe with a camera on the end down through your mouth and into your stomach so that we can look inside your oesophagus, stomach and part of the intestines.
This will allow us to try and see if there is anything wrong.
We would like to do this investigation because...
We think there might be bleeding in your stomach.
We think you may have an ulcer in your stomach.
We think your stomach juices are coming up into your oesophagus.
We want to see if there is a mass.
In order to help you swallow the camera, we will give you something to make you sleepy.
You will not be able to eat or drink from the evening before the investigation.
This is so that the stomach is empty so that we can see inside.
You should continue taking any medication that you are on.
A gastroscopy is a safe procedure.
However, sometimes something can go wrong.
The procedure can cause...
Bleeding in the stomach.
A hole in the stomach.
If anything does go wrong we will treat it.
Do you have any questions?
Are you willing to have the investigation?
You have a condition called HIV.
The HIV test was positive.
This means that you have HIV.
Do you know what HIV is?
Tell me what you know about HIV.
Do you know how a person can get HIV?
HIV is caused by a type of virus that infects the body.
You can get HIV by...
Having unprotected sex with someone who has HIV.
Sharing needles when you inject drugs.
Infected mothers can give HIV to their babies.
HIV cannot be cured.
When you get HIV, you will feel well for a number of years.
You will not have any symptoms.
During this time, HIV is attacking and killing your immune cells.
These are the cells that help your body fight off infections.
After a number of years, your body will start to run low on immune cells because of the HIV infection.
You will then start to catch many other infections and become sick.
Although HIV cannot be cured, it can by managed with medication and lifestyle changes.
When you start to run out of immune cells, your doctor will start you on a medication called ARV's.
You will then have to use this medication for the rest of your life.
The ARV's will slow down the HIV and help your immune cells come back.
The ARV's can have side effects.
Many of these side effects will go away by themselves.
If you have side effects, you must carry on using your ARV's, but speak to your doctor who will help you to overcome the side effects.
You will also have regular blood tests.
One of these tests is to measure your CD4 Count.
The CD4 Count is a measure of how many immune cells you have.
People with HIV can pass it on to the sexual partners.
You must take steps to protect your partner.
Your partner should also be tested for HIV.
Is anyone here with you?
Would you like them to come in?
What do you know about your condition?
What have you been told about your condition?
Unfortunately I have some bad news.
The results of the tests do not look good.
You have a serious condition.
Your condition has worsened.
You have a condition called...
Have you heard about this condition before?
What do you know about this condition?
This condition cannot be cured.
We will do what we can to make you more comfortable.
We will continue to look after you.
This condition requires an operation.
This condition requires intensive treatment.
This condition will require lifelong treatment.
How do you feel about this?
I can see you are...
Shocked
Upset
Angry
Do you want to know more?
Do you have any questions about your condition?
Do you know what the consequences of this condition are?
Will you have anyone to talk to at home?
Is there anything you would like me to do for you?
I will be here if...
You need to talk.
You need anything to be explained or repeated.
I would like to talk to you about your...
Smoking
Drinking
Diet
Exercise
Would you be comfortable discussing this?
Which of these issues would you like to talk about?
Which of these issues is the most important to you?
Is there something else you would like to talk about?
Do you think this is a problem in your life?
Is this something you would like to change?
How important is to to change this?
How confident are you that you will be able to make this change?
Why do you feel it is not important?
What are the good things and bad things about doing this?
What are the good things and bad things about stopping?
Can I give you some more information about why it is important?
What do you think will be difficult about changing?
How do you think we can overcome these problems?
Let us set a goal.
Many people do not get it right the first time.
It often takes a number of attempts to succeed.
What made it difficult for you?
What would you do differently next time?
When you are ready we can try again.
How often do you have a drink containing alcohol?
How many drinks do you have on a typical day when you are drinking?
How often do you have six or more drinks on one occasion?
How often in the last year have you found that you were unable to stop drinking once you had started?
How often during the last year have you failed to do what was normally expected from you because of your drinking?
How often during the last year have you needed a first drink in the morning to get yourself going after a heavy drinking session?
Have you ever felt bad or guilty about your drinking?
How often in the last year have you had a feeling of guilt or remorse after drinking?
How often during the last year have you been unable to remember what happenend the night before because you had been drinking?
Have you or someone else been injured as a result of your drinking?
Have you ever felt you should cut down on your drinking?
Have people annoyed you by criticising your drinking?
Has a relative, doctor or other health worker been concerned about your drinking or suggested you cut down?
Is it never, occasionally, monthly, weekly or daily?
Is it in the last year?
When you cough, you can spread germs and make others sick.
You can spread colds and flus, but also more serious conditions like tuberculosis.
It is important to cover your mouth when you cough.
This will help to stop the spread of germs.
You can cover your mouth with a tissue.
You can bend your arm and cough into your elbow like this.
You should try to keep the windows open so the wind can blow the germs out.
If you have any of the following problems, you should come straight to the hospital.
You have pains at the bottom of the abdomen and back.
Your waters break.
You are bleeding from the vagina.
You have a discharge from the vagina.
You cannot feel the baby kicking.
When you pass urine, it burns.
You have a headache.
You are seeing stars.
You have swelling in your hands or feet.
The pill contains a hormone which prevents you from falling pregnant.
One pill must be taken everyday at the same time.
It may cause...
Changes in menstruation.
Breast tenderness.
Nausea.
Headaches.
These side effects usually disappear after the first few months.
Once you stop taking the pill, you can get pregnant immediately if you have unprotected sex.
The pill will not work if you are taking HIV or TB medication.
The injection contains a hormone which prevents you from falling pregnant.
You will need to have the injection every...
Two months.
Three months.
Once you stop taking the injection, it could take up to one year before you're able to fall pregnant.
The injection will still work if you are on HIV or TB medication.
The implant is a small rod that contains hormones which prevent pregnancy.
It is inserted under the skin of your upper arm.
It will work for 3 years.
When the implant is removed, you can fall pregnant immediately if you have unprotected sex.
The IUD is a small T-shaped device that prevents pregnancy.
It is inserted into the womb by a trained healthcare provider.
It will work for...
5 years.
10 years.
Abdominal cramps or pain.
When the IUD is removed, you can fall pregnant immediately if you have unprotected sex.
The device will still work if you are on HIV or TB medication.
You will have to come back to the clinic a few weeks after the IUD is inserted for a check up.
Sterilisation is a permanent contraceptive method for people who do not want to fall pregnant in the future.
It can be done on men and women.
Female sterilisation is a simple operation that cuts the uterine tubes.
These are the tubes that carry the eggs from the ovaries to the womb.
You will continue to bleed normally after the sterilisation.
Male sterilisation is a simple operation that cuts the tubes that carry the sperm.
It takes 3 months for male sterilisation to work.
Sterilisation is permanent and cannot be reversed.
Most forms of contraception only protect you from falling pregnant, not from sexually transmitted infections.
Dual contraception involves using condoms and another contraceptive method at the same time.
This is the best way to protect yourself from unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections, including HIV.
Emergency contraception can prevent pregnancy when taken within 5 days of unprotected sex or making a mistake with your contraception.
There are pills which can be used for emergency contraception.
The copper device can be inserted into the uterus for emergency contraception.
You can take it when...
You have unprotected sex.
The condom breaks.
You forgot to take your contraception on time.
You are raped or forced to have sex without a condom.
The sooner you take it, the more likely it will work.
Expressed breast milk can be used...
To leave milk for the baby when the mother goes to work.
To relieve engorged breasts.
To relieve leaking breasts.
To keep up milk supply when mother and baby are separated.
Choose a cup, glass, jug or jar with a wide opening.
Wash the container with soap and water and leave to dry in the sun.
Pour boiling water into the container and leave for a few minutes.
This will kill any germs in the container.
When you are ready to express milk, pour the water out of the container.
Find a quiet, private place or sit with a supportive friend.
Try to have some skin-to-skin contact with baby before expressing.
This will increase the milk supply.
Warm the breast with a warm cloth.
Wash your hands thoroughly.
Sit or stand comfortably and hold the container near to your breast.
Put your thumb on the dark area above the nipple and your index finger on the area below the nipple.
Press the thumb and index finger inwards towards the chest.
Next, squeeze behind the nipple.
Continue to squeeze and release.
There may be no milk at first.
Then move the thumb and index finger to the left and right side of the nipple and continue.
After about 5 minutes, express the other breast.
Do not squeeze the nipple.
Do not press or pull on the nipple.
Try to express milk every 2 hours.
Store milk in a glass or hard plastic container.
Milk from each session should be stored in a separate container.
Do no combine milk from different sessions in one container.
If milk is not used immediately, it should be store in a fridge within 2 hours.
Milk may be stored in a fridge for up to 24 hours.
Milk can be stored in a freezer for up to 6 months.
