There are ways to tell whether you have rheumatoid arthritis or lupus.
Your complaint of the symptoms might point to other forms of arthritis such as osteoarthritis.
I would recommend that you see a rheumatologist.
I hear conflicting things about lupus, especially when it comes to its diagnosis.
How difficult is it to definitively diagnose systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)?
Is a positive ANA (antinuclear antibodies) at a specific dilution level required?
There is no difficulty making a diagnosis of lupus generally speaking.
A positive ANA can be an adjunct in the diagnosis of lupus, but it can also be seen in normal healthy people.
I would recommend you to see a rheumatologist.
Arthritis has different forms.
If people have inflammatory arthritis, they could be susceptible to infections, including flu-like symptoms, either from the disease itself or from the medications the patient might take.
Will arthritis progressively worsen as we age?
Arthritis has different kind of forms.
If you had osteoarthritis, then the joints could become worse with age.
However, if you do physical exercises to improve the functionality of joints, your joints might be stable.
Is there a genetic test for rheumatoid arthritis?
I was told to take Tylenol®  (acetaminophen) as needed on a daily basis.
Couldn’t this be harmful to the kidneys?
Tylenol is generally safe for kidneys, but it could be a harmful to the liver if people take over 4 grams per day.
What new treatments are there in arthritis in the joints of fingers?
Arthritis is a general term and includes many different forms of joint conditions.
The treatment is dependent on the condition.
I have very bad arthritis in my right knee and also in right ankle.
I have tried shots, therapy and braces provided by my foot and bone and joint doctors, but it did not help me.
Can surgery help me in this case?
What is the diagnosis of the joint condition?
Did you have trauma or injuries to the joints before?
I would recommend you to see an orthopedic surgeon.
Last September, I was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis, and started taking a DMARD (disease-modifying antirheumatic drug) of sulfasalazine (Azulfidine® ) 2 grams daily.
In February this year, I achieved remission with almost no pain, and no longer take NSAIDs often.
About two month ago, my doctor reduced the dose of sulfasalazine to 1 gram a day.
So far, the reduced dose did not lead to re-emergence of my symptoms.
My blood tests for inflammation (ESR [erythrocyte sedimentation rate] and CRP [C-reactive protein]) also returned to normal.
Is it possible to completely stop taking sulfasalazine some time in the future, or does sulfasalazine have to be continuously taken at some maintenance dosage?
Based on your experience, how common it is to have a rebound of arthritic pain after the DMARD therapy achieves the remission of rheumatic pain?
It is possible to completely stop sulfasalazine, but patients with rheumatoid arthritis could be at a risk of recurrence.
I would continue sulfasalazine 1 gram per day (a very small dose) for at least a couple more years.
Is it possible to shatter a nodule on a thumb joint in the same manner as a spur on a heel?
If the nodule bothered the functionality of the thumb too much, a surgery could be done.
If it was mild, I would just treat the pain and improve the function.
If you have had a deep venous thrombosis (DVT), should you still consider knee replacement?
What if your osteoarthritis is very painful?
Basically, what are the real deciding factors to consider for knee joint replacement?
Regarding knee replacement, people with knee osteoarthritis or other forms of arthritis have refractory pain and difficulty functioning.
Therefore, to ease refractory pain and improve functionality, the knee joint replacement would be needed.
For acute DVT, treatment with blood thinner such as Coumadin®  (warfarin) is necessary.
During this period of time, it would be ideal to avoid surgery.
I had a knee replacement, and the knee replacement was recalled.
I have pain 75 percent of the time.
Would I still feel pain from arthritis in that knee?
People with knee replacement could feel pain for a short period of time, such as several months.
If the knee pain continues after six months, then the knee should be assessed by an orthopedic surgeon for possible mechanical issue or loosening.
I’ve heard you can’t kneel after surgery.
Is this permanent or short-term?
Did you mean knee replacement surgery?
Physical therapy to recover the knee after knee replacement would be required for at least three months.
Physical therapy will be guided by a physical therapist.
Inappropriate kneeling would not be helpful in the recovery.
Arthritis seems to be a fairly common problem for people in their 70s and older.
Do you have any suggestions for lifestyle activities that help to limit the worsening of the arthritis symptoms, such as diet and exercise?
For instance, I participate in an aerobic exercise class in a warm water pool and that reduces the pain from my arthritis.
Physical exercise is helpful in the relief of osteoarthritis-related pain.
Each individual joint would require individual exercise.
For example, for knee osteoarthritis, quadriceps strengthening exercise is advised.
Supplements such as glucosamine and chondroitin might be helpful in some cases.
I would urge you to continue to do the warm water pool therapy.
I do a lot of lifting of buckets since I care for farm animals, and I go up and down stairs often.
Should I cut back on my manual labor if I am diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)?
People with rheumatoid arthritis or SLE can do physical activities or labor work, depending on his or her symptoms.
The exercise will be tailored to each individual and the degree of the exercises should be based upon an individual’s tolerability.
Can cracking knuckles cause arthritis?
Trauma or injury can cause traumatic osteoarthritis.
Are there any exercises recommended for improving arthritis pain?
The exercise could relieve pain and increase endurance or stamina.
I am a 73-year-old woman and I believe I have osteoarthritis.
The pain in my knees is my worst symptom lately, but it started years ago with an inability to stand for long periods of time without pain.
I am now finding stairs very difficult—whereas I used to go up and down easily and effortlessly.
I am also very stiff on rising, especially from a sitting position.
A few months ago I tripped and broke my shoulder.
So, all of the focus of physical therapy and orthopedics has been on the shoulder, but the leg symptoms are actually more troublesome.
What can be done?
Your knee problem may likely represent osteoarthritis or degenerative changes.
I would recommend trying knee quadriceps-strengthening exercises and knee braces with heel wedges.
But these would be best assessed by a rheumatologist and instructed in person.
I have severe arthritis, and I am in constant pain.
Should I walk or exercise?
Arthritis has many different forms.
Generally speaking, no physical exercise would be encouraged while people have active joint pain.
However, physical exercise, including joint exercise, can ease pain for people with mild pain.
What preventative treatments do you recommend to help slow down or even prevent arthritis in general?
What vitamin can I take?
I am also wondering how menopause affects arthritis.
For osteoarthritis or degenerative changes, physical exercise, glucosamine and chondroitin would be helpful in some cases.
For rheumatoid arthritis, which is a type of inflammation, hormonal changes could affect the disease process.
In your opinion, is it beneficial to take supplements for osteoporosis as an additional therapy for rheumatic arthritis, particularly at the remission stage?
Any supplements with vitamin D. and calcium components would be helpful.
Are there any dietary changes one can make for an occasional—and I mean once every few years—gout flare-up?
It is so painful (as you know) and I wind up on a Medrol®  (methylprednisolone) dose pack to alleviate the pain.
It is obviously not recurrent enough to go on any type of medication.
Diets are very important in the management of gout.
I would recommend you avoid food such as mushrooms, fatty meat, internal organ meats and seafood.
Certainly, alcohol reduction will be also helpful.
What foods help arthritis?
What are the advantages and disadvantages of a fish oil supplement?
Fish oil and a low-sugar diet might be helpful in some cases.
Glucosamine and chondroitin might be helpful for osteoarthritis in some cases.
I would avoid overtaking fish oil, too.
For arthritis, are there certain foods that should be consumed or avoided?
If so, what about mushrooms, for example?
Nipple retraction can be a sign of breast cancer particularly if this represents a change in your body.
If you have nipple retraction, you should have this examined and worked up by your physician to determine if cancer might be the underlying cause.
I am 23-year-old female.
The nipple of my right breast is little painful when I press it even though there is no discharge, no rashes and no lumps.
There is nothing—just a little sore when I touch it and it gets a little thick simultaneously.
The pain is minimal, and this is happening only on the right side.
This just started four or five days ago.
All females should perform monthly self-breast examinations.
Changes in your breasts need further evaluation.
What can cause shoulder pain in a patient with breast cancer?
You really need an evaluation by a physician for what is causing the pain in your shoulder.
Pain in the shoulder can be caused by the joint, joint capsule, muscles, tendons or the nerves.
Pain can also occur if the muscles are moving in a way they are not used to—which can happen when the muscle is affected by treatment or surgically changed.
There are the usual causes of shoulder pain which all people can develop, such as arthritis, adhesive capsulitis, biceps tendonitis, rotator cuff tears, scapulohumeral dyskinesis, myofascial disease, radiculopathies, neuropathy, etc.
Then there are a few neuromusculoskeletal issues that are unique to breast cancer patients, such as tamoxifen-induced arthralgia, radiation fibrosis syndrome, axillary web syndrome, postmastectomy pain syndrome, and breast cancer-related lymphedema.
A physical medicine and rehabilitation specialist can help you with evaluation, medication, and can work with a therapist on designing a therapy program.
Can having work done on your breast, such as reduction, implants or lifts, cause breast cancer or increase your risk for breast cancer?
I am not aware of any association between breast operations, such as reductions, implants or lifts, and an increase in breast cancer risk.
These procedures are not thought to increase the risk of breast cancer.
What are the current screening guidelines for women?
A great place to start is our latest health guidelines for women at Is breast cancer inherited?
Genetic aspects of breast cancer will be discussed in detail.
Who is involved in treating breast cancer?
There are a variety of medical professionals involved in treating breast cancer.
Each patient may meet different health team members depending on their needs.
Some physician team members you may see include a radiologist, breast specialist, oncologist, radiation oncologist, breast surgeon, plastic surgeon, physiatrist (physical medicine and rehabilitation physician) and geneticist.
You may also benefit from a social worker, physical therapist, occupational therapist, speech therapist, vocational therapist, nutritionist and support groups depending on your needs.
You will hear many different things during your care, and this can be confusing.
I always recommend that patients use a notebook to write down the names of people they meet, contact information, follow-up information, and advice that they have understood.
What should I look for in a surgeon for my mastectomy?
One should look for a surgeon with experience in the management of breast cancer.
Additionally, it is important that the surgeon work in collaboration with other specialists (including plastic surgeons, radiation oncologists, rehabilitation specialists, genetics and medical oncologists) who also treat breast cancer as part of a breast cancer program.
Seeking care in a nationally accredited breast program would be a good place to start.
Accreditation in the United States is done through The National Accreditation Program for Breast Centers (NAPBC).
How do you decide between a lumpectomy and a mastectomy?
Mastectomy and lumpectomy are operations designed to remove cancer from the breast.
Each surgery has its advantages and disadvantages.
Each patient should consult her physician and family members in making a decision.
Decisions should also be made with consideration of the size of the tumor and the patient's medical history.
Lumpectomy is good for patients with smaller tumors, but often is combined with radiation treatments to give the best results.
Some patients with larger tumors can also have lumpectomy if they are treated with chemotherapy first.
Mastectomy involves removal of the whole breast, and may be required for patients with large tumors or tumors in multiple locations in the breast.
Many patients who have mastectomy choose to have breast reconstruction following removal of the breast.
Many patients having lumpectomy do not need radiation treatments.
Learning about your particular tumor type and stage, and discussing these issues with your surgeon and physician is very important.
Seeking a second opinion regarding your case is another approach to educate yourself about your treatment options and the advantages and disadvantages of each approach.
After a mastectomy, how long does it take to recover?
What about the lumpectomy—how long does it take to recover from this surgery?
Recovery from breast surgery is variable.
Mastectomy recovery depends on what type of mastectomy is done (simple mastectomy vs modified radical mastectomy), and is also affected by the type of breast reconstruction (if performed).
Recovery also depends on the general health of a patient—with healthier patients generally recovering faster.
Recovery from lumpectomy is generally quicker than mastectomy, but recovery from lumpectomy also depends on the extent of axillary lymph node surgery performed.
Recovery following both operations can be accelerated by participation in a rehabilitation program.
What type of reconstruction method do you recommend after mastectomy?
My sister had TRAM (transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous) flap surgery in 2006, and had so many complications with this method that she regrets it.
She has recently had surgery to correct the complications and is doing ok at this time. lad your sister is doing ok at this time.
The type of reconstruction offered after a mastectomy depends on several factors.
The factors to be considered are the extent of surgery required to remove the tumor, the anatomy and body type of the patient, the need for further medical treatments (including radiation) and patient preference.
I am a smoker with breast cancer.
I have been told that I cannot have reconstruction after my mastectomy because of this.
Complication rates (including infections and skin flap breakdown) for breast reconstruction are significantly higher in smokers.
It would be best to stop smoking and then discuss options for reconstruction with a breast reconstructive surgeon.
Are there things I can do before surgery to make rehabilitation easier?
I think the best thing you can do is to find out what precautions you will have after your surgery and to plan ahead.
You may have restrictions for how far you can move your arms after surgery or how much you can lift after surgery.
This will depend on the type of surgery you have and your surgeon’s instructions.
You will need to take time off work when your undergo surgery as well.
My best advice is to plan ahead and be flexible.
Can you describe the rehabilitation process?
The rehabilitation process is a process which primary deals with how your function is affected by disease.
How each person is emotionally and physically impacted by disease is different.
Learning about what things are important to each patient impacts the rehabilitation plan.
For example, after surgery you can develop swelling, pain due to muscle imbalance and pain from surgery.
After radiation you can develop fatigue.
After chemotherapy, you can develop numbness in your hands and feet.  Not everyone develops symptoms after treatment.
A rehabilitation therapist gets a baseline understanding how you physically move by taking physical measurements of strength, range of motion, balance, endurance and sensation testing.
How each person is affected by cancer is different and a therapy plan will be made to fit each patient’s needs and wants.
Therapists also provide education on how to care for yourself and prevent disability.  Does everyone need to go through a rehabilitation process?
I think all breast cancer patients can benefit from some sort of rehabilitation process during or after treatment.
Part of the rehabilitation process is education on the prevention of disability, identification and treatment of current issues that can lead to disability, and education on how to monitor for body changes that could lead to disability.
Some patients need ongoing help from a therapist for monitoring of function and physical changes—others do not.
You can work with your therapist, and discuss how often you may need to see her or him.  Also, as you go through different medical treatments (surgery, radiation, chemotherapy and hormone therapy) you may develop different needs.
I think knowing that there are rehabilitation services available to help you with a variety of needs is important.  What should I look for in a breast rehabilitation physical therapist?
It depends on what your needs are.
A general physical therapist that is familiar with cancer patients may be appropriate.
Physical therapists work on improving range of motion, stretching, strengthening, improving endurance, and building exercise programs for you.
With breast cancer you need to develop a slow, progressive resistance exercise program in addition to an aerobic exercise program.
At what time should I see a physical therapist?
You can see a physical therapist at any point during your cancer diagnosis treatments or after treatment.
It is best to start seeing a therapist when you are starting your breast cancer treatments, so that you can have someone who knows your baseline function and can help you with preventing disability, monitoring your body changes, and treating your symptoms as you receive treatment.
You and your therapist can also discuss what goals would be appropriate to work on at each stage of your treatment.
At times you need to maintain your function, and at other times you will need to improve or restore your function.  Can you tell me what energy conservation is?
Energy conservation is a systematic way of planning your day to take advantage of doing the things you want to do when you are feeling you best and able to enjoy them.
You need to have a full physical evaluation to see if there are other causes for your fatigue which, if treated, can improve your overall function.
As a breast cancer patient how much exercise should I do?
How much is too much?Sree_Battu,_MD: Before starting any kind of exercise program you will need to be cleared by a physician.
Particularly with breast cancer, there may be issues with your bones from the spread of cancer or issues with your heart from treatments or a comorbid (coexisting) disease.
Can I lift weights after breast cancer surgery?
Immediately after surgery you should follow your surgeon’s instructions on weight limits and range of motion.
In time you can participate in a progressive resistance training program.
A physical therapist is key in helping to design a program that is safe for you and your pace.
Your therapist will take into account your previous physical fitness and work with you to get you back to that level if possible.
After surgery and treatment your muscles may move differently because they are in different places or changed in some way (e.g., radiation can produce a fibrosis of the muscle).
It is unsafe to over strain your muscles as this can cause damage.
A trained therapist familiar with breast cancer patients and their needs can help slowly develop a program of stretching and strengthening to build your new muscle without straining.
Your therapist often can design an exercise program to accommodate a weakened muscle.
The strengthening of other muscles that do similar actions can allow you to perform a specific function despite the weakened muscle.
This type of slow progressive strengthening program along with education has been shown to help reduce lymphedema symptoms.
I am a breast cancer survivor and I have osteoporosis.
Do you have any exercises tips for me?
Exercise helps to maintain your bone mineral density.
I am worried about how breast cancer will affect my body image and sexuality?
This is a sensitive and important issue you should discuss with your physician team.
Your preferences should be known to your team, so they can help guide you with decision making.
Breast surgery or radiation to the breast does not physically decrease a woman sexual desire or libido.
However, hormone and/or chemotherapy can impair ovarian function which does impact your libido.
Depending on the type of breast cancer you have depends on what type of options you have for side effect treatment.  Common physical side effects can include pain with intercourse, vaginal dryness and loss of libido.
Many women turn to their oncologist, obstetrician/gynecologist (ob/gyn) and/or psychologist to help with sexual functioning and emotions after breast cancer treatment.  Common emotional side effects include changes in body image, loss of self esteem and changes in relationships.
Rehabilitation therapists and psychologists also can help with some of the cosmetic and emotional issues associated with changes in your body.  What can you do to prevent disability from breast cancer and treatment symptoms?
There are several proactive things you can do to help prevent disability from breast cancer and its treatments.
I tell all my patients to do the following My mother died from breast cancer at the age of 58 years old.
Other than getting an annual breast examination and mammography, what are the things I can do to prevent getting this disease?
What role does diet play in this disease?
You should be aware of your entire family history and discuss this with your doctor to determine if referral to a genetic counselor is indicated.
A healthy lifestyle is important.
Obesity and alcohol consumption are factors that are known to be associated with increased breast cancer risk.
What things are covered by insurance, and what things are out-of-pocket costs?
Most insurance companies pay for physician visits with a physical medicine and rehabilitation specialist.
Most insurance companies pay for physical and/or occupational therapy.
There are certain ‘cap’ limits with physical therapy and occupational therapy, so you would want to speak to your therapist when making a plan.  Some insurance companies pay for lymphedema-certified therapists and therapies; others do not.
You can always request an appeal and send additional documentation for this type of therapy.
Many times if you do developed lymphedema, insurance companies pay for lymphedema pumps, but they do not always pay for compression garments.
Compression garments and short stretch bandages are not ‘durable’ equipment or everlasting, so some insurance companies do not allow you to use your durable medical equipment coverage for these items.
Compression garments need to be changed every four to six months because they lose their elasticity.
How common is lymphedema after breast cancer treatment?
What treatment method do you think works best?
I am an occupational therapy assistant looking to expand my skills.
I will be taking a seven hour continuing education course on breast cancer treatment with lymphedema, and considering going on to become a certified lymphedema therapist.
They use a method that involves compression wraps, exercise and decongestive massage treatment and generally frown on compression pumps.
Does this sound like a common treatment method that would be used with breast cancer lymphedema?
Unfortunately, there is no consistency in the diagnosis of lymphedema at this time.
I have seen reports that range from 10 to 60 percent for how common lymphedema is after surgery from breast cancer.
There are some other schools as well which include Földi Clinic, Norton School of Lymphatic Therapy, Klose Training and Consulting, LLC, Lymphedema Therapy Certification Courses and Casley-Smith International.
Many therapists gain skills from courses at multiple schools.
It is important to know in what situations pumps can be useful and in what situations they are not useful.
I have seen patients benefit from all treatment styles.
What we would like all the participants in this webinar to gain from attending is that you are not going through the journey alone.
There are many resources to help you.
Rehabilitation is an extra layer of therapeutic and support services that works with your medical team to help you live the life you want to lead.
Your medical team focuses on curing or halting your disease process.
Your rehabilitation team is there to help you deal with adjusting to medications, changes in your body, and sometimes the temporary or permanent limitations in your body that are the effects of your medical treatment or the disease itself.
Your rehabilitation team is here to work hand- in-hand with your medical team.
The goal of rehabilitation is to individualize a program that works for you and helps you to attain your functional goals.
You and your needs are at the center of this process.
The process depends on what is appropriate for your care—which may be prevention of disability, restoration of your function, or improvement of symptoms.
Whether you were recently diagnosed with cancer, undergoing active treatment, a cancer survivor with no evidence of disease, or have metastatic disease, a rehabilitation team can help you and your loved ones live with the disease process and your care.
The breast cancer rehabilitation process starts a referral to either a specific type of therapist (physical, occupational or speech) or a rehabilitation physician who can help navigate the process.
This was useful when our concerns were saber cats and cave bears.
Such situations were rapidly resolved.
Today's stress—like the pain it often causes—is chronic.
Your boss doesn't eat you and you can't run away.
The physiological conditions that the stress creates don't go away.
The muscular tension created by stress often settles in the pelvis or the shoulder girdle.
Don't get me started on stress and inflammation.
I get frequent and often severe headaches.
What are recommended alternative treatments to help with headache pain?
I am not sure what causes the headaches, if that makes a difference.
For headache, I would start with osteopathic manipulation therapy specifically cranial-sacral therapy.
Some of my patients are surprised when I start with their pelvic and legs before moving my way up.
Alignment starts with how I stand on planet Earth.
Alignment is critical to my body mechanics and how my cranium interacts with my neck.
How my head and neck align will influence not just the fascial and muscular layer, but can affect the flow of blood, lymph and cerebrospinal fluid.
This ordering of treatment is my bias.
My mother has chronic back pain, works a very stressful job and has a stressful life.
She was recently prescribed Xanax®  (alprazolam) for the stress.
She said that it has taken away most of her pain as well and she has cut down on her pain medications considerably.
Is it O.K. for her to combine the two therapies and is the pain relief from the Xanax®  normal?
Chronic stress has been associated with pain, depression and anxiety.
Using Xanax® may be helpful in the short term because it will allow the patient to have less anxiety during stressful situations.
It doesn't, however, address the underlying issue and it will usually lead to tolerance (requiring increasing doses to have the same effect) and can lead to addiction.
So, I would recommend against using long-term Xanax® for your mother's pain.
I strongly recommend using a combination of magnesium (500 to 1000 at bed time) along with sipping chamomile tea throughout the day to assist with anxiety.
Your mother would likely benefit from seeing a holistic psychotherapist to deal with stress management.
She may also consider ways to reduce her external sources of stress.
I have been on Enbrel®  (etanercept) for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and Savella®  (milnacipran hydrochloride), Flexeril®  (cyclobenzaprine hydrochloride) and Naprosyn®  (naproxen sodium) for pain related to fibromyalgia.
Although the RA is under control, the fibromyalgia-related pain continues despite these medicines.
What alternatives should I be discussing with my doctor?
Many patients with fibromyalgia have inadequate sleep, which may lead to fatigue, pain and depression.
These can also be symptoms of low total body magnesium status.
Taking a magnesium supplement of 500 to 1000 mg at bed time can be very useful in helping with the underlying cause of the symptoms as opposed to covering up symptoms of low magnesium with drugs.
High doses of magnesium may cause diarrhea.
I recommend beginning with 500 mg at bed time and adjust the dosage upward to 1000 mg, stopping at perfect daily bowel movements.
The next culprit is usually dairy. try the same with dairy if needed.
If there is still significant pain, consider being evaluated by a physician in the Center for Integrative Medicine for intestinal permeability issues (leaky gut syndrome).
There can also be a role for manual medicine with some patients, but this can be contraindicated for others.
Can you suggest how to manage painful neuropathy due to multiple sclerosis (MS) throughout the body without the use of medications?
My first choice making sure that a MS patient's vitamin D level is between 50 and 80.
A low vitamin D status has been associated both with MS and chronic pain.
Two other supplements may be very helpful, including Omega 3 fatty acids (fish oil) at doses 2000 to 6000 mg per day as well as alpha lipoic acid 600 mg twice daily.
As always, avoiding inflammatory foods (as specified in an anti-inflammatory diet) should be part of any plan for chronic pain.
What kind of treatment do you recommend for the pain associated with cervical spondylosis?
I am assuming that the problem is neck pain.
You need to be evaluated for musculo-skeletal problems associated with the spondylosis.
Is there any new medications or maybe an NSAID that is advisable for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients who take Coumadin®  (warfarin sodium) daily?
My preference is to avoid NSAIDs for daily use if possible.
Therefore, for patients with chronic pain who are using Coumadin® , they may want to consider integrating complementary therapies to minimize the use of NSAIDs.
My husband , who diagnosed with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy six months ago, cannot walk or stand and has extreme pain in his legs and feet.
He also has daily nausea.
He is receiving intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) monthly and takes quick, long-acting morphine daily.
He will be started on high-dose prednisone.
Where should we go from here?
Will he be comfortable with alternative pain treatment?
What can he do to promote nerve regeneration and stop the autoimmune response causing this disease?
Every therapy comes with some kind of time limit, i.e., ‘How soon will I see some kind of result?’
I would recommend lifestyle changes first, including diet and exercise.
I believe that these are the most important things in any pain management program.
If you don't know how to get started, I think that you need to find a therapist or doctor you can work with to help you develop a program of diet and exercise.
Also, such an individual can help with guiding you to appropriate therapies.
Given the autoimmune component, if his symptoms continue to be significant after implementing the above, consider being evaluated for intestinal impermeability.
I have had Ménière disease since I was in my teens, but at the time of its occurrence I was never diagnosed with it.
They treated it with prednisone, antihistamines, etc.
It disappeared for more than 30 years.
In 2008 ,it reappeared, with severe tinnitus, hearing loss, pressure in the ears and severe vertigo.
I received three injections of cortisone in the ear and eventually it subsided, In 2009 I had the same situation, three more cortisone injections, oral prednisone, diazepam, and vestibular rehabilitation.
Again, it went and came back in 2010.
I underwent the same process again, until September 2010 when they put me in betahistine dihydrochloride (Serc® )—a non-FDA approved medication here in the U.S., but a medication that has been used over 40 years in Europe, South America, Canada and Mexico.
It was a blessing.
I was vertigo free until March 3 of this year.
It came back stronger—many times in the same day.
I underwent cortisone injections again, etc.
I have to finalize vestibular testings to then decide what are we going to do, but the next step surely will be the injection of gentamicin to kill my vestibular system.
Can you please provide your input?
It has been very disabling for me.
I have not been driving in the past four months.
I am only 58 years and the main caregiver of a family member with severe disabilities.
Craniosacral therapists are a bit harder to find, since I am only aware of a handful of practitioners.
I am not familiar with manual lymphatic drainage, but I also would be very interested in that technique as an alternative to ‘killing’ my vestibular system.
You bring up a problem I have with medications.
Patients almost always develop a tolerance to medications and with time they stop working.
Medications can be useful and essential, but almost always work best in a context of multiple therapies—including what we call ‘alternative’.
The pain begins in my lower right neck area, goes through my shoulder area and continues down my right arm.
I have already experienced a loss of temperature sensation in my right side.
I am currently taking Ultram®  (tramadol) and Neurontin®  (gabapentin).
Do you have any suggestions on different courses of action?
It is likely that with 4,000 years of history the Chinese physicians had to treat everything we see today. hy do I continue to have knee pain even though I had surgery one year ago?
Since then I had my knee drained three times and had three cortisone shots, but the pain is still there.
Why, and what should I do about this?
I am assuming that you have already spoken with the surgeon who did the replacement.
You need to make sure that the replacement appears normal.
The next thing to look at are musculoskeletal problems that arise as a result of the replacement.
Total knee replacements are well understood and generally the surgeons do a good job, but a replaced knee is never the same as the original.
When you exercise on the knee your stance may be a bit off.
You may be applying asymmetric force down through the joint.
Problems may reach up into the pelvis and the lumbar region.
A manual medicine approach like osteopathic manipulation therapy or similar protocols may help.
Further physical therapy may be indicated.
