Most of the literature is on full-time bracing, and this can be effective if the bracing is worn 16 to 18 hours per day.
There is not much information on nighttime bracing.
I feel it is helpful for lower curves or thoracolumbar curves.
Are there any advances in less invasive surgical techniques for scoliosis?
There was an early push for minimally invasive scoliosis surgery.
The excitement for this has lessened.
My daughter has it and I'm wondering if her children are at risk for developing it.
Yes, there is a genetic component to scoliosis.
We currently know of 54 different genes involved.
Because there are so many genes, we do not know how to predict the likelihood of family members developing scoliosis.
Is there any new learning on alternative therapies like physical therapy or other treatments?
There has been more literature out of Europe showing beneficial effects of the Schroth Method of physical therapy in reducing progression of curvature.
Also, core stretching and strengthening is beneficial to all of us from a physical fitness standpoint.
We understand that children are not just small adults.
Our staff feels strongly that the care of children’s orthopaedic problems differs immensely from adult orthopaedics – and we treat our patients according to their age, development and size.
We pay special attention not only to their medical/surgical needs, but also the relationship among the caregiver, child and his or her family.
There are many subtypes of these cancers.
Cervical and vulvar or vaginal cancer can be linked to HPV.
Ovarian and uterine cancer can be linked as part of a hereditary syndrome called Lynch syndrome.
I have heard about a link between breast and ovarian cancer.
Is breast cancer also linked to other gynecologic cancers (cervical, uterine, etc.)?
Breast cancer is generally not linked to uterine or cervical cancer.
Can you describe the symptoms?
My grandma passed from cervical cancer, but I am immunosuppressed from a kidney transplant so I am trying to be educated and aware of all possibilities.
Some symptoms to be aware of include: abnormal bleeding related to or not related to the menstrual cycle, bleeding between menstrual cycles, bleeding after intercourse and pelvic or back pain.
However, cervical cancer can be screened for effectively with Pap smears and can be detected in a pre-invasive or early stage.
Cervical cancer is not hereditary, but immunosuppression is a risk factor for it.
In addition, I have had a C-section.
I am on estrogen birth control now and do not take the sugar pills to stop bleeding altogether; but if don’t, I have periods that last months and terrible pain with them.
It’s unbearable and I can handle pain, but this pain is so intense, I have to take 1.5 Vicodin every four hours to even take the edge off.
They have not found any cancer and have suggested that the pain is due to scar tissue, but why would my body be doing this?
Being immunosuppressed and being on estrogen does not feel like a safe long-term solution, but a hysterectomy is being cautioned due to high risk.
Could these be worrisome symptoms for cancer, and do you have suggestions on why my body is doing this?
I believe you would benefit from an office visit with one our specialists to address your concerns more thoroughly.
Peritoneal (inclusion) cysts are benign.
However, they may become large/grow and produce symptoms.
If you have had it for 30 years and it has remained stable/unchanged and has not been causing symptoms, it does not need to be removed.
I was recently diagnosed with a uterine fibroid that is approximately 8 cm.
I have had symptoms for 10+ years.
I do not want a hysterectomy.
How worried should I be that this might be uterine cancer?
Is there a test to determine if it is cancer without surgery?
Uterine fibroids are generally benign and are not associated with cancer.
There are some non-surgical options for treatment of uterine fibroids that can be offered.
When would “Wait and Watch” be an option after minimal post-menopausal spotting?
We would not recommend watching and waiting unless investigations were negative.
I'm almost 90 and in good health.
I had scant vaginal spotting two months ago, and nothing since.
A pelvic ultrasound and MRI were inconclusive, as the radiologist could not see clearly past fibroids.
Four years ago, spotting was caused by irritation from a bike saddle.
Without spotting, are there other symptoms?
A pelvic exam is also needed.
I wondered without spotting for two months, whether I would be considered asymptomatic.
Any bleeding or spotting after menopause would need to be evaluated and considered an abnormal symptom.
If you have already been evaluated, I would recommend following up with the doctor who is treating you.
Would any gynecologic cancer ever show up on transvaginal ultra as spots or "foci" of "increased echogenicity?"
Ovarian cancer may be seen as a mass or complex cyst on one or both ovaries.
Some of these descriptions (calcifications or increased echogenicity) may need to be evaluated further or explained in the context of the ultrasound and their location.
However, a medication to "soften" the cervix can be given to facilitate the procedure.
I have uterine/ovarian cancer that was detected so early that CT scans did not pick it up.
Now that I have completed six months of chemo and radiation, repeated CT scans show nothing.
How do I know that the cancer is in remission?
Recurrence of uterine or ovarian cancer is most often detected based on new symptoms and signs, with an office examination with your oncologist.
A blood test (CA125) may be a marker of early recurrence if elevated prior to surgery.
What is a pelvic exam?
What is the procedure?
How often should a woman get a Pap smear?
I hear differing guidance now.
The new guidelines recommend screening starting at the age of 21 with Pap smear (without HPV test) every three years up to the age of 29, then every three to five years until the age of 65.
My daughter is 31 and was just diagnosed with ovarian cancer.
Will it still be possible for her to have children?
Depending on the surgery performed or to be performed and the stage of the cancer, she may be able to have children if the uterus and one of the ovaries is preserved.
My mom just had an emergency hysterectomy with stage III ovarian cancer and now has an issue with fluid building up.
She is being treated and now has a drain.
Will this be an ongoing issue or will her body correct the fluid reaction?
Usually, this issue resolves with time.
Why does this develop in 25 percent of women?
I’m not a good candidate for future surgeries to repair [the hernia].
The risk of hernia after laparoscopic surgery is in fact very low (less than 1 percent).
Most hernias can be repaired surgically if symptomatic.
A consultation with a general surgeon may be helpful.
I was diagnosed (CA125) with H/O squamous cell carcinoma cervical cancer metastatic to lymph node in Puerto Rico in 2014.
Then I received radiotherapy and five chemotherapies of carbonplatin and Taxol.
In 2015 at Hershey Penn State Hospital, I was diagnosed again with lymph node in the right inguinal area and received cisplatin and 11 radiotherapies.
Presently in 2016, it came back again, and I am receiving five chemotherapies of Gemzar.
My leg is swollen and I can touch the nodules in my right inguinal area.
I don't want to take more therapies because I feel too weak to work.
I don't know what doctor to go to here.
I would recommend a second opinion from a GYN Oncologist.
I don't think my mom is getting very good care at her current hospital.
There have been a few episodes of negligence, and she just had her hysterectomy 10 days ago and has a long road to recovery.
I am trying to talk her into exploring the idea of switching hospitals and cancer care teams.
She is hesitant because the current hospital already is treating her, and they diagnosed her and operated on her, so she feels she is too far down the path to switch.
What is your recommendation?
Is this process too much trouble than it is worth at this point?
If her cancer treatment has not started already after surgery, it is not too late to seek a second opinion.
Generally, review of medical and surgical records would help guide additional treatments.
I would recommend a second opinion if you are not comfortable.
Perimenopause includes the years leading up to menopause and on average starts about four years before periods actually stop.
This is the time when periods become farther apart, and symptoms such as hot flashes may begin.
How do I know if I am in perimenopause since I have heard that so many of the symptoms are close to what I already experience with my ADHD?
You did not mention your age, but on average menopause (which is cessation of menses for 12 months) happens around 51.4 years old.
Perimenopause begins around four years before periods stop.
The average age range is 45 to 55 for periods to completely stop, with some people being a little younger and some a little older.
It is abnormal to stop periods completely before age 40, although there are women who have irregular cycles.
During the perimenopause, along with symptoms experienced after periods completely stop, it is very normal for women to have hot flashes, sleep disturbances and sometimes mood changes.
The hallmark of the perimenopause is the lengthening of the interval between periods, with cycles becoming more like 40 to 50 days, instead of the usual range of 24 to 35 days.
I’m 46 years old and started having hot flashes at night.
Have I started menopause?
How long will this last?
Hot flashes frequently start in a woman’s 40s.
If you are not skipping periods or having a lengthening of your cycle, it is not perimenopause yet.
However, instead of the more regular cycles women have in the earlier years, the hormone fluctuations in the 40s can be quite pronounced, even when the cycles are still regular.
That is why some women who are still having regular cycles will begin to have hot flashes.
Hot flashes can occur intermittently during this time and frequently become more pronounced when the cycles start to lengthen.
Some women will spontaneously stop hot flashes about a year after their periods stop.
Many more will stop by four or five years after menopause.
However, about 9 percent can continue indefinitely, even into their older years.
Does having gone through fertility treatment and having had several children at all affect when perimenopause may start?
Fertility treatments and having children do not affect when perimenopause starts.
The reasons for needing fertility treatments can sometimes affect the timing.
The average age for menopause is 51.4 years.
The menopause transition or perimenopause starts on average four years earlier.
There are factors that can influence when you start this transition, such as heredity and smoking.
Sometimes, women who have had a hysterectomy can have an earlier menopause.
Do women in the same family generally go through menopause at the same age, or is it more dependent on other factors?
I am 52 and in perimenopause, but have a sister who is 54 and also still having periods.
Unfortunately, my mom doesn't remember the age she started menopause.
Heredity can affect the timing of menopause, but not always.
Other factors such as health issues and smoking can also affect it.
Women who have had pelvic surgeries especially hysterectomies can sometimes start earlier than they would if not having had surgery.
On average the transition to menopause (meaning 12 months without a period) takes about four years.
This transition is when women begin skipping periods and may begin having menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes, vaginal dryness and mood changes.
However, that is only an average; it could be shorter or could be longer.
I’m perimenopausal and was told I should be taking low-dose birth control pills.
There are several reasons a low-dose birth control pill may be prescribed.
One is for managing menstrual problems; another is to treat perimenopausal symptoms such as hot flashes.
Birth control pills can also alleviate both menstrual irregularities and the associated major hormone fluctuations that are common in the perimenopause.
What are the pros and cons of taking hormones with the onset of menopause?
I had my mother stop taking Premarin, and she aged 10 years overnight.
If you are having issues with hot flashes, insomnia, mood changes and vaginal symptoms such as dryness, there is no better option to alleviate them than hormone replacement therapy.
Hormones are safest when you start them right after menopause.
This is not true if you start hormones in your 60s after many years of not being on them.
There can be an increased risk of cardiac events in this age group.
The biggest con of starting hormones right after menopause is that there is a slightly increased risk of clotting events such as deep vein thrombosis.
After five years, there is a slight increase in the risk of breast cancer if you are taking an estrogen-progesterone combination (which you have to do if you have a uterus).
Women who have had a hysterectomy taking only estrogen actually showed a decreased risk of breast cancer.
I have been taking 1mg estradiol for five years.
My doctor assures me this is safe.
I have no history of breast cancer in my family.
I had a partial hysterectomy 20 years ago.
I had a saliva test a few years ago, and my estrogen levels were off the chart.
I understand levels would be elevated due to being on estrogen, but that high?
I have tried to wean myself off the estrogen, but when I do, I have hot flashes at night.
I have tried natural forms of hormones such as Young Living Progessence Plus oil and a supplement in pill form (I can't remember the name or brand), but neither were effective.
I am 52 years old.
What are your thoughts regarding long-term usage of estrogen?
I agree with your doctor on this.
The biggest risk of hormone therapy is a slightly increased risk of blood clots.
When you are only on an estrogen, there is no increased risk of breast cancer.
The safest and best time to start hormones is right after menopause.
Estrogen is the best medication to relieve the symptoms of menopause that you still have.
Saliva tests are not reliable and cannot be used to monitor therapy with hormones.
I do not recommend them.
When you use non-regulated options such as lotions and supplements, there is no regulation for purity, content or ingredients.
The reality is that even the compounded substances, also not regulated, are all man-made.
I recommend you stick with your estrogen.
You can always try to see if you need it in a few years.
There is no pressure to get off it now.
Remember, women who start hormones at the time of menopause have a 30 percent reduction in mortality.
This is not true if starting them when you are older and many years beyond your final period.
I thought birth control pills could put women over 45 at danger for blood clots and other possible side-effects.
Birth control pills can safely be used by women up until the time of menopause, on average 51.4 years, as long as there is no contraindication to them such as high blood pressure.
I also do not recommend them in women who have a BMI over 40, as this greatly increases the risk of blood clots.
All women, no matter how old they are, have an increased risk of blood clots on the estrogen/progesterone birth control pill.
This is not true of the progesterone-only pill.
But remember, a pregnant woman has a far greater risk of having a blood clot.
Birth control pills can be very useful in managing some of the menstrual issues that woman have in their 40s, as well as a good contraceptive option.
In a woman without contraindications, including a strong family history of blood clots, they are a good option.
Also, birth control pills decrease the risk of both ovarian and uterine cancer.
When should a woman stop taking hormones post-menopause?
It also depends on why you are taking them.
Other health issues that you may be having can also influence the decision.
Therapy can be just a few years for some women and indefinitely for others.
Are there alternative treatment options for menopause?
It depends on what specific symptoms you are having.
Treatment options will vary from none needed to hormonal and non-hormonal options.
These options are individualized depending on the person, as there is much variation.
I’ve been having hormone pellets implanted quarterly for a year.
Can estrogen and testosterone pellets make blood pressure increase?
If so, what does one do if they need to keep having the pellets?
Administration of hormones this way is unapproved and unregulated, and is not a method I would recommend.
Testosterone is sometimes associated with elevations with blood pressure.
When pellets are administered, the initial exposure is large, followed by a decline.
Women will sometimes show the effects of excessive androgen with these.
Also, if you have a uterus, you should also be taking progesterone.
There are many other, safer, well-regulated methods to deliver hormones including tablets, patches, cream and gels.
Methods chosen are individualized to the patient depending on their specific concerns.
What are your thoughts about using a natural progesterone cream during perimenopause rather than taking hormones?
Also, I see some creams recommend using them after menopause as well.
What are the pros and cons of doing this?
It is important to be aware that all of these products are man-made.
They are usually derived from yams.
However, they are not regulated; there is no regulation of purity, actual ingredients and levels of medication.
Progesterone creams cannot provide a high enough level of protection of the lining of the uterus, so they are unsafe when used to balance out a "natural" estrogen.
There are regulated forms of bio-identical estrogen and progesterone that are regulated.
These include Prometrium (the progesterone) and Estrace®  (an estrogen).
I think of progesterone creams as very expensive body lotion.
I think there are both hormonal and non-hormonal options for menopausal symptoms.
These options have to be individualized, as not all women experience exactly the same symptoms.
Also, there is no regulation of these substances so the purity, ingredients and efficacy are not assured.
There are also bio-identical regulated hormone options such as Estrace and Prometrium.
Remember, all of these products are ultimately man-made.
Also, some of these substances can cause side effects and may interact with other medications you are taking.
I would recommend a visit to a women's health specialist to discuss what options would be best for you to deal with the symptoms you are having.
It is a safer way to go than experimenting with unknown quantities.
Is that a part of the body preparing for menopause?
In general, if this happens under age 40, it is not normal.
Between 40 and 45, it can be normal but would need to be evaluated.
For those 45 and older, it can be normal during the perimenopause.
Heavy or intermittent on-and-off bleeding is not normal for this time.
After you have gone 12 months without a period, any bleeding is considered abnormal and needs evaluated.
It does not mean something bad is happening, but it needs to be checked out.
Sex has become painful since menopause.
There are many things that can help with pain with intercourse after menopause.
Lubricants can be very helpful.
Unlike before menopause, when estrogen is still present, silicone-based lubricants work better for many women than the traditional water-based lubricants.
An example of a good silicone-based lubricant is Astroglide Silicone.
This can be obtained at any regular drug store.
Better lubricants are not enough for everyone, however.
Almost always, a very small amount of vaginal estrogen will improve the problem greatly.
Estrogen is administered vaginally either by a ring that stays in the vagina for three months and is then replaced, a cream or a vaginal tablet that is inserted.
For women who have contraindications to any form of estrogen, there are vaginal suppositories made from DHEA that can be helpful.
Systemic administration of estrogen with or without progesterone (without only if you don’t have a uterus), and a non-estrogen oral tablet called Osphena®  are also used for dryness with intercourse.
I am 50 years old.
Is it "the norm" to experience "brain fog" and be disorganized with perimenopause when your mind was once fresh, and organization skills were your forte?
Also, is there something not hormone related one can do for those types of perimenopausal symptoms?
Brain fog is common at midlife for a variety of reasons.
One can be the wild hormone fluctuations that are occurring during this time.
Many women after having a baby experience the same fog.
Also, if you are having hot flashes or sleep disturbances, it can greatly affect your thinking.
Another reason is that frequently you are busy and distracted, and that can affect concentration.
I would recommend a visit to your doctor to discuss the symptoms you are having and possible solutions for them, both hormonal and non-hormonal.
Therapies recommended have to be individualized always.
Is it normal for periods to become irregular by missing total months at a time?
It depends on how old you are.
If you are between the ages of 45 and 55 (the time of transition to menopause), it can be normal.
Between the ages of 40 and 45, it can be a sign of an early perimenopause, but other conditions need to be ruled out.
Under age 40, it is not normal and needs to be evaluated by your doctor.
Is it common to still get the typical menstrual cramps, etc., during perimenopause and menopause?
If you are still having periods, you can still get cramping.
The advent of new, non-characteristic pelvic pain or cramping is not normal.
If this is occurring, an evaluation with your doctor is in order.
After menopause, pelvic cramping not related to bleeding can have several causes.
If that is the case, I would again recommend an evaluation with your doctor.
What can I do about facial hair I’ve developed due to menopause?
Facial hair is common as we age.
There are several reasons for this.
One is genetic factors.
Also, after menopause, although the ovaries are no longer making estrogen, they do still make testosterone.
This imbalance of hormones can make certain women susceptible to unwanted hair growth.
There are several options for treating this.
There are creams that are applied.
Laser hair removal works for others.
The sudden appearance of hair is different than the gradual appearance.
A dermatologist can give you advice on some of the medical options as well.
I have been suffering from menopause for 20½ years.
It started when I was 44; I'm now 65.
My doctor has been baffled that nothing works to alleviate any of my symptoms (hot flashes, being permanently hot, memory loss and insomnia).
I have tried all over-the-counter and prescription medicines available and nothing works.
We both have given up thinking there is a solution for me out there somewhere.
Would you have any suggestions?
That has to be very frustrating for you.
That is the best way to individualize the best options for you.
I had a D&C back in 2014, and the doctor at that time thought I'd start menopause in about a year or so.
Given that medical science is not an exact science, here I am now, almost three years out from the surgery, and my periods are appearing farther and farther apart.
Could I finally be starting to make that transition to menopause?
The timing of the final period is very hard to determine.
The best indicator is the frequency of your periods.
Once you have gone three months without a period, the final period is expected usually within four years.
The time of fluctuating periods (perimenopause) can go on for four years on average.
Once you have gone 12 months without a period, by definition this is menopause.
If you go six months without a period and then have bleeding, you should see your doctor for an evaluation.
While not usually a serious problem, some gynecological problems can present themselves by bleeding like this.
It sounds like you are making the transition to menopause.
I'm 55 and haven't had a period in two years, but had one out of the blue in November.
It is not normal.
It does not mean something bad is happening; rarely, women will have a "period" after all that time.
However, it absolutely needs to be checked out.
There are many causes of this type of bleeding including both benign reasons and non-benign reasons such as uterine cancer.
This is a very important symptom and one that requires medical evaluation and advice.
I don't know the size of the fibroids you have, but in general, especially after menopause, fibroids will shrink as time goes on.
They rarely cause problems after periods stop.
However, large fibroids will only shrink, at most, 30 percent, but will still be present.
If you’re not having symptoms such as pressure, pain and bleeding, nothing needs to be done with them.
Fibroids are stimulated by hormones, and as estrogen levels decline and progesterone is no longer produced, most women have far fewer problems with their fibroids.
Now that I’ve gone through menopause, am I at risk for other diseases?
One of the major risks is to your bones.
Bone loss begins even before periods stop.
It is important to take 1200mg of calcium per day in divided doses with meals.
Don’t ever take more than 500mg, as the body won’t absorb it.
Also needed is 1000 to 2000 IU of Vitamin D. Bone density testing should begin as directed by your doctor depending on your risk factors.
You begin to lose some of the protection estrogen has provided to your heart as well.
Factors such as family history of cardiac disease, weight, cholesterol, especially in association with other diseases such as diabetes, are all important.
Many diseases such as colon cancer and breast cancer increase as we age.
Prevention strategies are very important, including colonoscopy and mammogram.
Lifestyle factors such as exercise, weight control, healthy diet and regular sleep become even more important as we age.
There is a difference between a feeling of warmth and a hot flash.
Hot flashes are usually confined to the chest and travel to the face with an extreme feeling of warmth, flushing of the face and possibly resulting perspiration.
They usually last from one to five minutes.
There are many things that can cause an overall feeling of warmth, including certain medications, stress, anxiety and room temperature.
Weight can also be a huge factor, as it acts like an insulator.
If you are still having feelings of warmth, I would recommend a physical exam with your doctor.
A women's health specialist can help you figure out if this is related to menopausal hot flashes.
There are some women who have actual hot flashes indefinitely, even into their 70s and beyond.
The oral medication Letrozol increases the chance for twins by five percent, and Clomid has a five percent to 10 percent increase for twins.
The injectable drugs produce about 20 percent increase for multiples which include triplets or more.
If diagnosed with chronic salpingitis, are you able to still get pregnant naturally on your own?
I have lost my left tube due to an ectopic pregnancy, had the HSG test done and was told about the salpingitis, but was told the right tube is open.
Which treatments are available for someone with PCOS who has been struggling with weight loss for years?
No diet or exercise has helped reduce body weight.
Would it ever be necessary for someone who has had ovarian drilling done for PCOS treatment and responded well, but has since stopped ovulating with and without medications, to need the ovarian drilling to be done again? Also, how important is taking Metformin in helping with PCOS symptoms?
Are there any other medications that help reduce symptoms, while still TTC?
I had been taking Metformin, but my insurance has stopped covering it.
Ovarian drilling is a minor outpatient, laparoscopic procedure for treating infertile PCOS patients who’ve failed to ovulate in response to oral fertility drugs.
While injectable fertility drugs provide the same ovulation and pregnancy rates without surgery, they require daily injections and frequent visits for monitoring with ultrasounds and blood work, carry risks for multiple pregnancy and over-stimulating the ovaries (a potentially serious condition), and the cost to achieve a pregnancy is usually higher.
The beneficial effect of ovarian drilling often lasts for many years, but the data are scarce on repeat procedures.
Does age play a role in IVF or other treatment options?
What would you say is the ideal age to have a baby?
We have been trying to have a baby for some time now.
I was wondering if there is an ideal sexual position for conception.
There are many myths that have been circulating for decades. Among those that make no difference are sexual position, lying around with the hips elevated after intercourse, taking cough syrup and the type of underwear the male wears.
Regular monthly cycles are indicitive of normal ovulatory function but  infertility may be impaired byby other factors such as abnormal sperm production,  tubal disease, fibroids or endometriosis.
I heard that having an orgasm during sex can help you conceive.
What do you think: Does having an orgasm help you to get pregnant?
My husband and I have been trying to have a baby since the beginning of 2017.
We talked about it over Christmas and New Year’s and decided to have a baby.
How long should we try before we seek the help of a doctor?
My husband and I have been trying to have a baby for over a year now.
We have not consulted a doctor about the issue because we are scared to find out if there is something wrong.
Could you talk about the most common problems you see day to day?
Also, what options are there for couples if they have one of these problems?
There are several potential problems that can lead to infertility. Treatments options are individualized based on the results of fertility testing.
Some problems include: not ovulating, blocked fallopian tubes, scar tissue in the pelvis, endometriosis, fibroid tumors and sperm production problems. The cause of infertility is unexplained in about 25 percent of couples.
ICSI stands for intracytoplasmic sperm injection and involves injecting a single sperm into each mature egg with IVF. It is primarily used for couples with a severe male factor problem. Our IVF lab performs ICSI on all of the mature eggs to assure optimal fertilization rates at no extra charge.
Is there a resource I can use to find an infertility specialist in my area?
You can go toasrm.org.
It is the website or our national infertility society. It is a great resource for finding more information about infertility, as well as finding providers in your area.
The Ob/Gyn & Women’s Health Institute is designed to meet the unique and changing medical needs of women from adolescence to mature adulthood.
Our team offers coordinated and supportive care for the programs that affect women’s lives, from infertility, incontinence, gynecologic cancers, pelvic floor disorders, menopause and more.
We are committed to providing world-class care to women of all ages.
Outdoor activity is my life, but with pain in my lower back, hip region, both knees, posterior tibialis tendonitis, shoulder and something new frequently, my life is miserable with pain, including at night.
I do yoga, stretch, ice, roller foam, occasional NSAIDS, prescription inserts, knee braces and rest, but nothing seems to help for very long.
A physician who can diagnose the entire body is either a rheumatologist or a physical medicine and rehabilitation specialist.
You do not need a referral to see either one.
I currently suffer from arthritic trapezium joints in both hands.
I have taken injections every three months for two and a half years.
I was told that I can no longer receive these injections.
Which surgical procedure is the better option?
There are several different types of surgical procedures that can successfully treat this condition.
A hand surgeon would be able to discuss which procedure would be best for your particular arthritis.
I am 51 years old with tendonitis in both upper arms/shoulders.
I have had many shots of cortisone that have not been successful.
It is very difficult to do daily chores, and I have difficulty sleeping.
Do you have any suggestions to help?
If you have not had MRI's, that would be your next step to confirm that tendonitis is the issue to be treated.
The next step would be a course of physical therapy, which needs a referral from a physician.
Surgery would be a last resort depending on your response to therapy and what the MRI shows.
I do not have enough information to make a diagnosis to say whether or not surgery would be helpful.
X-rays and an MRI can determine if something can be done arthroscopically or if some type of arthroplasty is indicated.
I had a botched microdiscectomy a year ago.
I also have degenerative disc disease of the cervical spine.
I live in constant pain from osteoarthritis, but my concern is that I have had a very salty taste in my mouth since the surgery and wonder if I could possibly have a spinal fluid leak someplace and my neurosurgeon is missing it?
I'm dizzy with both legs in pain and tingling with low back pain, not to mention the agony of my cervical spine issues.
Is a fluid leak possible, and how to I get a doctor to listen about this?
All I get from doctors is "I dunno."
Do you have any suggestions? Spinal fluid leaks are rare and would not typically result in a salty taste.
Given your symptoms of dizziness and tingling and your concerns, I recommend that you be seen by a neurologist.
It is very important for you to gather your medical/surgical records including clinical notes, lab tests, imaging test results and imaging pictures (the CD of the actual MRI/CT) to bring with you or send ahead for review prior to the consultation.
For about three years, I have had chronic lower back pain that is present at rest but worsens with exertion, but with no particular morning stiffness.
An x ray taken recently showed some evidence of a little amount of calcification of the anterior longitudinal ligaments and mild sacroiliatis, but it was reported as within normal limits.
I have mild pain in my left knee on exertion as well.
In addition, I have a neck pain with tenderness in the lower neck region.
I had an episode of severe tendinitis in my hand a while back, but was told it could possibly be attributable to hypermobility in the joints.
However, I also get frequent episodes of tenderness on tendon insertion points in the elbows on minimal exertion.
Should I be tested for ankylosing spondilitis, or can there be another course of action?
The symptoms you describe may be representative of an early inflammatory arthritis or may simply be due to degenerative arthritis (osteoarthritis) and soft tissue tendinitis, particularly if you are hypermobile.
X-rays need to be interpreted in the context of your medical history and physical examination.
There is no single test for ankylosing spondylitis.
Is trigger finger related to arthritis?
If so, what type of treatment is available to help the problem? It can be, but it can also be a separate condition unrelated to arthritis.
It is treated initially with a steroid injection and if the triggering returns a simple outpatient surgery.
There is also no guarantee that plasma or stem cell injections will make your pain go away.
In fact, for this condition they are not likely to help at all.
I agree that surgery is a last resort.
It sounds like you have done all of the proper treatments that are currently available.
The surgery is major with a very long recovery.
