What percentage of in-brace correction do you expect to get from a brace to consider the brace effective?
For example, if the patient has a 35 degree thoracic curve, what percent would you look for?
And what type of brace (e.g. Boston, Rigo Cheneau, other) do you recommend to achieve the desired in-brace correction?
Perhaps the most important component of brace effectiveness is patient compliance.
There is good evidence that suggests that if patients wear their braces according to the recommend guidelines that they're significantly more likely to be effective than those who do not.
The amount of in-brace correction is likely less important.
That being said, an in-brace x-ray should show some correction of the curvature in brace to confirm that it can potentially be effective.
The bottom line here is that if the patient is a candidate for a brace, they must have a brace that does improve the curvature somewhat on x-ray, and it should be worn according to the prescribed guidelines as best as possible.
To date, there is no medical evidence that suggests that any brace can improve a patient's curvature.
Occasionally, we may see a brace effect on an x-ray when a patient has been wearing a brace with some regularity.
Ultimately, however, the brace cannot improve a patient's curve.
There is good evidence that a proper brace can slow down the progression of a patients curve in a growing child.
Success rates are anywhere between 50 percent and 85 percent, and are very closely linked to patient compliance.
Back braces, even soft ones, have been shown to cause the muscles that support the spine to weaken, so theoretically, I agree with the pain specialist.
That said, the brace may provide support to allow her to be more active.
There is little harm in trying a brace.
My recommendation would be to minimize use of the brace and continue exercising, specifically to condition the muscles that support the spine.
What does the data say about the number of hours prescribed for wearing a brace?
Is there a significant difference in outcome if an adolescent wears the brace 16 hours a day versus 23 hours a day or just at nighttime?
The brace wear schedules are different for a Boston versus Providence or other nighttime brace.
The evidence would seem to indicate that a minimum of 16 to 18 hours of brace wear can produce the desired results in a Boston-style brace.
There does not seem to be significant evidence that increasing this to 23 hours a day improve things significantly.
There is less evidence on the nighttime bending brace; however, compliance tends to be quite good with them.
They work differently and there is less brace wear, only when the patient is sleeping.
The evidence here, however, suggests that if worn nightly that the bending brace can be effective at slowing curve progression in a majority of patients as well.
My daughter is nine, will be 10 on Tuesday.
She was noted to have a curve of seven at her initial exam and x-ray in March of 2014.
In July, she had a follow-up exam and x-ray, which showed that the curve increased to 15.
The pediatrician said that we would just continue to watch her.
However, in the last month or so, my daughter has been experiencing pain in her back.
She also, within the last two weeks, is having pain in her leg and heel when running.
The pain is bad enough that she can't continue physical activity.
I approached her doctor about going to see an orthopedic doctor.
The pediatrician doesn't think it is necessary because her curve isn't at or above 20 yet.
Could the pain be related to the diagnosis of scoliosis?
Your daughter’s heel pain is most likely not related to the scoliosis whatsoever.
This would require an independent evaluation by a pediatric orthopedic specialist.
If she's having back pain, she should also be seen by an orthopedic specialist.
I would agree that curvatures that progress to 20° require evaluation and treatment by an orthopaedic specialist.
Your best bet is to obtain a referral at this point to address both problems.
Is it possible to "train", through yoga and stretches, a curved spine to straighten?
Can pregnancy and childbirth cause spine curvature?
It is not possible to straighten a spine with idiopathic scoliosis through exercise.
Exercise, however, can be vitally important particularly in adults.
Exercises such as yoga and Pilates are very good at strengthening core muscles and are very effective in managing the pain that can sometimes be related with scoliosis in adults.
Pregnancy and childbirth do not cause spinal curvature.
In the past, it was thought that pregnancy was associated with increased progression of curves, but this has been shown not to be true.
There may in the late stages of pregnancy be some increase in the curve but this tends to resolve by about one year after the cessation of breast-feeding.
Stretching and yoga have both been shown to improve pain associated with scoliosis and other back conditions.
Currently, there is no medical evidence that suggests that either yoga or stretching can affect the natural history of curve progression.
The only two things that have been shown to do this are a brace or an operation.
I am told by my orthopedic surgeon that surgery will put me out of work.
I am female, 59 years old, and learned only two years ago that I have 58 degree levorotoscoliosis.
I had been suffering from sacroiliitis for the better part of two years.
The surgeon related the sacroiliitis to the scoliosis.
Injection to the joint with cortisone did not help.
I cannot – will not – take narcotics.
In desperation, I tried chiropractic treatment, which has been very successful.
I was able to start physical therapy and have been much more functional, yet no one in the medical community would recommend chiropractic treatment.
My insurance limits the number of chiropractic visits to 20 per year, although this is the only treatment that helps.
What is your stance on chiropractic treatment for this type of problem?
Chiropractic has been shown to provide short-term relief of acute pain, and a good chiropractor may be able to mobilize the joint to provide temporary relief.
I'm glad that you mentioned physical therapy and exercise, it is important to continue to do those exercises regularly.
Can a chiropractor effectively manage scoliosis (particularly in a teenager)?
If so, what should we watch for that might indicate it is not being managed well?
Most of the management for adolescent scoliosis consists of monitoring the curve for progression.
Many chiropractors are able to do this.
Some chiropractors also prescribe braces and exercise, which may help lessen progression or symptoms related to the scoliosis.
There is, however, no good evidence that chiropractic treatment can reverse scoliosis, even though this has often been claimed.
Chiropractic care can be very useful in some cases at managing pain associated with scoliosis or other back conditions.
Currently, there is no medical evidence that chiropractic care can effectively manage the progression of the curvature.
The only two things that have been shown to affect the natural history of scoliosis are a brace or an operation.
The patient is 47 and has a marked dextroscoliotic curve in the upper lumbar region measuring 40 degrees with multilevel degenerative changes associated with varying degrees of central stenosis, subarticular stenosis and intervertebral foraminal stenosis.
The patient also has a prominent scoliosis in the thoracic spine with a shift to the left with a hypokyphosis noted in the thoracic spine with decreased range of motion noted.
The patient has had an open sternal reduction due to severe pectus excavatum.
The patient also has a lung FEV of 35 percent.
The patient is unable to keep his O2 level above 90 percent during exercise and many times during daily activity.
The patient is a state champion bowler and has a goal to get rid of back and hip pain on the lower left side and improve O2 levels to a point of being able to exercise, sleep and fly without oxygen.
The patient hopes moderate improvement could do that.
The patient has worked his adult life on managing symptoms via exercise, chiropractic care, massage, physical therapy and NSAIDs.
He has been told he is not a good surgery candidate.
I agree with the exercise, PT and chiropractic.
As far as pain control, injections may be a beneficial adjunctive to exercise.
Also, hip pain has multiple causes.
A thorough examination by a physical medicine specialist of the hip, spine and surrounding muscles would be in order if not recently done.
What are your thoughts on vertebral body stapling and tethering to correct scoliosis through retarding growth on the convex side while allowing growth on the concave side?
Do you ever recommend these procedures in adolescents with significant growth remaining?
If so, at what curve levels?
The indications for this procedure are essentially the same as the indications for brace treatment.
Patient must have significant growth remaining and curvatures between 25° and 40°.
In my practice, I recommend bracing for these patients and encourage compliance with the brace wear schedule.
Bracing does have good medical evidence that suggests it positively affects the natural history of the disease process in the majority of cases, and the risks of bracing are significantly less (essentially zero) than those of stapling or tethering surgeries.
I think that significant further evidence should be available before we apply this technique more widely, as there are significant risks compared to bracing.
This technique has been employed in very few centers around the United States and the rest of the world.
It is usually performed via a thoracoscopic approach, which is for the most part minimally invasive.
It does, however, violate the patient's chest and, in so doing, will reduce the patient's maximum pulmonary function tests a small degree.
The risks of any surgery are going to be inherent here as well.
Is traction a practical treatment for scoliosis?
There is no evidence to my knowledge to show traction to be effective in the management of scoliosis.
Cervical traction may be beneficial in upper limb pain caused by a pinched nerve in the neck, but this is unrelated to scoliosis.
I am an 82-year-old female, diagnosed with Parkinson's disease 12 years ago.
I have exercised daily (aerobics and walking) for 40 years.
My back pain has gradually increased for the past year and now prevents aerobics and walking more than 1/2 mile.
My doctor determined the cause of the pain to be scoliosis and prescribed physical therapy.
The PT stretching exercises help only slightly, and I can't stand up straight for the first one and a half to two hours of the day until the PD medications (carbidopa/levodopa) take effect.
Exercise is essential to prevent the rigidity of PD.
I am advised not to take over-the-counter pain relievers.
Do you have suggestions for relieving the pain caused by scoliosis in this situation?
I agree about the importance of regular exercise.
If the pain is severe, you may want to be evaluated by a spine specialist for consideration of spinal injections for pain control.
In most cases such as your daughter's, the scoliosis can be managed by adjustments to their chair.
This essentially acts as a brace for someone who is non-ambulatory.
The indications for surgery are severe pain or problems with skin breakdown over bony prominences that may be related to the deformity.
The scoliosis may have complicated the management of the dislocated hip but it did not cause it.
Because the pelvis is often tilted, it is sometimes difficult to get control of the ball in the socket of the hip joint.
In someone who is non-ambulatory, a major spinal surgery to realign the pelvis in order to contain the dislocated hip is generally not indicated, as it does not provide a significant functional improvement and does contain significant risks.
Spinal deformity surgery in adult cerebral palsy patients has an extremely high complication rate and is only done as a very last resort.
I have one of those curvatures in the cervical spine that makes my neck have the look of a turtles as it comes out of its shell.
Is there any hope of "changing" this, invasive or non-invasive?
What you are describing sounds more like postural dysfunction than scoliosis.
This may respond to physical therapy for stretching the muscles in the front of the neck and conditioning the ones in the back that support the neck.
Do you have knowledge of the Schroth method to treat scoliosis?
It appears they have had much success with their method, yet there are so few practitioners in this country who practice it or even know of it.
It would be a great option for those of us with scoliosis.
Why isn't it used here more?
This method employs some specific stretches in an attempt to modulate incorrect scoliosis.
It is a very intense an aggressive program which can produce some early improvement inpatient curvatures.
What are your feelings on the Schroth method of physical therapy to treat scoliosis?
My daughter is 13 and we found out about four weeks ago that she has scoliosis.
She has been wearing the Boston brace for about two weeks.
We have our first "in brace" x-ray next week to see if the brace is doing its job.
We are considering Schroth, specifically going to a clinic for a one-week intensive treatment.
This method seems to provide some early improvement in patients’ curvatures.
It may also help reduce any pain that may exist.
Unfortunately, it has not been shown in the medical literature to alter the natural history of curve progression in its patients.
There is, however, good medical evidence that a Boston brace, if worn according to the recommend guidelines, is indeed able to alter the natural history of curve progression in a majority of cases.
No brace can permanently improve a patient's curvature, but a good brace if worn properly can be very effective at slowing down or even stopping curve progression in a child who has growth remaining.
Do you have any data on this method's effectiveness?
Also, do you prescribe the Rigo Cheaneau brace or the Boston brace?
Our center uses either the Boston brace or Providence brace for management of potentially progressive curves in patients with growth remaining.
Most of the evidence shows that early improvement is all that is obtained by this method.
Certainly, any treatment method will work better if the patients and families are dedicated to the treatment protocol and adhere to it.
There are not many.
Most of them are short-term and used relatively small numbers.
Unfortunately, we know that scoliosis patients vary with degree, age, growth, type of curve and type of scoliosis, and they especially vary with compliance to treatment procedures.
I have been told that Europe is far more aggressive with non-surgical experimental methods.
I am not arguing a specific agenda, only seeking knowledge and helpful data.
I greatly appreciate your help.
They have information on many different modalities that have been attempted to treat scoliosis and other spine deformities.
Have a great day.
Unfortunately, most of us are taught that we shouldn't look or touch "down there”.
I recommend that women should periodically look at their vulva (external genitals), and if they notice something different (itching, painful area), ask their doctors about it.
Women who have gone through the menopause should have no bleeding or spotting.
If they do, they should seek immediate medical attention to evaluate this.
Most often, it will be nothing to worry about; however, it may be something serious.
Should more conscientious measures be taken to test for colon cancer or other types of cancer?
This in and of itself does not predispose someone for other cancers.
This is a genetic condition that is most commonly associated with colon cancer.
Does having in vitro fertilization (IVF) or any of the fertility drugs put you at a greater risk for GYN cancers?
Our understanding of the association with infertility, infertility drugs and ovarian cancer has evolved.
It is not entirely clear if the drugs are causing an effect or if women with infertility are more predisposed to these tumors.
While we do see a correlation, it appears that there is an increase in "borderline" ovarian cancers, but probably not the typical ovarian cancer that requires surgery and chemotherapy to treat.
Borderline tumors are technically classified as cancer, yet exist in between non-cancers and cancers.
We generally remove them surgically, but they have a low likelihood of recurring.
We do not give chemo for these tumors, in general.
I am 62 years old and have been through menopause.
For the past year, I have been experiencing bleeding intermittently as if I were still having a period.
I never know when I will have this bleeding.
It has started as of lately being more frequent.
Is this an indication of cancer?
It may be, however I would not panic.
There are many other reasons for this as well.
I would suggest that you see a gynecologist as soon as possible for an evaluation.
If the lining of the uterus appears "thickened," the doctor will likely recommend a biopsy or a D&C to determine the cause.
This could be a benign polyp, precancerous condition or a cancer.
If it should be cancer, most often these are caught early and are entirely curable.
Go see your doctor.
Where does the Bartholin gland drain from, and if someone has a bad history of CIN3/HSIL plus positive HPV bad strains and has abnormal vaginal bleeding plus a Bartholin gland that fills with blood and must be drained, is this an indication that there's a possible GYN cancer?
The Bartholin gland is responsible for lubricating the vagina.
It often can get clogged and then infected requiring incision and drainage.
This is unrelated to the CIN.
Bartholin glands can rarely become cancerous.
I would not worry about this.
If the infection recurs, your doctor can excise the gland and rule out cancer.
I'm post-menopausal and for the last month I have noticed when showering a small (the size of a grain of rice), non-tender bump on my inner labium.
It is not getting bigger but is getting firmer.
There is no irritation and no difference in color, and I can't SEE anything in the mirror; I only FEEL it.
I'm scheduled to see the GYN in two weeks.
In the meantime, do you have any thoughts on what this might be?
While you should definitely have this evaluated by your gynecologist at the time of your scheduled visit, I can say that we often see benign problems, such as blocked hair follicles/pimples or sebaceous cysts, that can have the same description.
If your gynecologist has any concern when he or she sees it, the doctor will perform a biopsy in the office.
Would you talk about GARDASIL® ?
Is there any risk for giving it to young people?
GARDASIL and CERVARIX®  are the two approved vaccines for the prevention of HPV-related diseases in the genital tract, including cervical cancer.
Both vaccines protect against the two "high-risk-type" strains of HPV, which are responsible, in part, for the development of 70 percent of cervix cancers.
GARDASIL additionally protects against the development of genital and anal warts in males and females.
There is much information available online on the American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of OB/GYN websites, as well as the websites for the specific vaccines named above.
Is one more accurate than the other just because of size?
HPV testing and Pap smears done with ThinPrep collection are screening tests.
ThinPrep involves swishing the small plastic broom with which we collect Pap smears in a special liquid that is then placed on the microscope slides to be analyzed.
The liquid helps separate the cells and can make viewing them under the microscope easier.
If a Pap smear is abnormal or an HPV test is positive for "high-risk-type" strains, then colposcopy and biopsies are then done to make the actual diagnosis.
Pap smears tell us that there could be a problem; biopsies tell us what the problem actually is.
Any patient with a history of cervical dysplasia is at risk for recurrent dysplasia (precancerous changes) so evaluation is always required.
So, if I've had an abnormal Pap plus colposcopy that led to conization surgery and diagnosis of CIN3/HSIL with positive bad HPV, is there any way I can be assured that the abnormal bleeding I have is perimenopause OR a recurrence of bad lesions?
First, an abnormal Pap most often should be followed up with a colposcopy.
This is a test, as you know, that allows your doctor to visualize the cervix better and identify any abnormal areas.
The abnormal area(s) then can be biopsied so we can determine number one if there is a cancer present.
In most circumstances, we identify pre-cancer.
In this case, CIN3 is the most severe form of pre-cancer.
It sounds like your doctor recommended a LEEP or cone.
These are procedures that are intended to remove ALL the abnormal tissue.
We generally recommend close follow-up with Pap smears to determine if this was successful.
Most precancerous lesions of the cervix do not cause bleeding.
If you are having continued bleeding following your cone, you should be re-evaluated by your doctor.
There are many reasons for this that may not have anything to do with the cervical pre-cancer.
If you are done with you family, having a hysterectomy may be your best option.
Drs., do you ever see patients that have the serious pre-cancers like mine (CIN3/HSIL) if further problems arise like I've mentioned?
I don't have a diagnosis of a cancer, and don't know how one would ever be made and my abnormal bleeding involves more than my vagina right now - so do you (either) ever make an exception and see patients without a cancer diagnosis?
My body tells me this is very abnormal - and not sure if I should just give up and perimenopause run its course (even though there's nothing to prove perimenopause).
Yes, we commonly see patients with CIN.
I would feel comfortable recommending an evaluation by a Gyn Oncologist.
Can cervical cancer be detected early?
And what are the signs or symptoms?
Cervical cancer is, thankfully, one of the cancers that we can detect and treat early.
In fact, we most often detect precancerous changes through Pap smears and HPV testing and are able to treat the precancerous changes and prevent cancer from developing.
Regular Pap smears are essential.
Symptoms of cervical cancer include heavy or irregular vaginal bleeding, continuous vaginal discharge or drainage, pain during intercourse or a feeling of pressure in the pelvic area.
These symptoms do not mean a person has cancer, but should definitely be evaluated by a doctor.
How is cervical cancer treated?
And is this something a teenager can get?
Cervical cancer treatment depends on the stage that we detect it.
Fortunately, with Pap smears, we are usually able to catch cervical cancers at an early stage when they can be cured with surgery.
Tumors that are too large to cure with surgery can be treated with radiation and chemotherapy.
Cervical cancer that has spread from the cervix to other areas of the body can be treated with chemotherapy.
It is extremely rare for a teenager to develop cervical cancer.
Because of this, it is recommended that women do not begin getting Pap smears until age 21.
It was thought to be Stage 1b.
I had an ablation and what was left of the tissue was suspect – a sample was not taken prior to the ablation.
Chemo and/or radiation were not recommended.
Even though I am approaching my five-year mark, I am concerned that there will be another cancer of a different type.
Are GYN cancers precursors for other types?
We prescribe treatments (or decide no additional treatment is necessary) based on that information.
In your case, since the doctors did not know you had cancer until the ablation was already done, they were not able to accurately determine the "stage" information because the ablation likely destroyed much of the tumor and also the lining of the uterus, which is needed to take measurements.
You are five years from surgery so the chance of the cancer returning is almost zero.
Also, patients with a strong family history of uterine and colon cancer may be recommended to undergo genetic testing for a possible hereditary cancer syndrome.
You should discuss this with your doctor if appropriate.
The uterus is composed of the inside lining (endometrium), the muscle wall (myometrium) and, technically, the cervix.
We can see cancers arise in all of these areas.
Cervical cancer is relatively rare since the Pap smear does such a good job of identifying precancerous lesions.
Cancers that arise in the muscle layer of the uterus are called sarcomas and can be very aggressive cancers.
Luckily they are quite rare.
Two of the less common subtypes of ovarian cancer, clear-cell and endometrioid-type, are more commonly seen in women with prior history of endometriosis.
However, the overall risk of developing ovarian cancer remains very small and no specific screening or treatment is recommended other than routine gynecologic evaluations.
I have a young friend, only 25 years old, in the late stages of ovarian cancer.
Isn't the early 20s awfully young for this type of cancer?
What could have possibly been the cause?
This is very unusual.
Ovarian cancer, at least the type we commonly see, occurs in older women.
This type of cancer originates from the epithelium or "skin" of the ovary.
These cancers have a propensity to break off and circulate around the abdomen and land on other organs.
This explains why so often this cancer is caught in later stages and early detection is so difficult.
In her case, given that she is so young, this may represent a cancer that has arisen in a different part of the ovary, such as the "germ cell" – the portion responsible for making eggs.
These cancers occur more commonly in young women and behave differently.
They can be aggressive and often respond favorably with surgery and chemotherapy.
How is ovarian cancer detected and can it be cured?
For the most part, we have not been successful.
This is due to a number of reasons; first being that normally the ovary is small and deep in the pelvis.
It is not easily examined like we can with, say, the breast.
Second, ovarian cancer tends to spread to other organs in the pelvis and abdomen relatively early before a large mass grows on the ovary.
Finally, the symptoms of ovarian cancer are very common – bloating, nausea, pain, frequent urination, etc., and are often overlooked until late in the game.
What are the causes and risk factors for ovarian cancer?
Are there different types of ovarian cancer?
We are not sure what causes ovarian cancer to be honest.
We do know that certain women are at significant risk to develop this disease, including those with a family history of breast or ovarian cancer.
Of all the common cancers, ovarian cancer has the highest likelihood of having a genetic cause.
BRCA 1 and 2 mutations are associated with a 20 percent to 50 percent lifetime risk of developing this cancer and an even greater likelihood of developing breast cancer!
Risks of developing ovarian cancer, aside from genetics, include never having a baby, not breastfeeding, early menses and late menopause, anything that increase the number of ovulatory cycles a woman has.
Women on OCP's, who have had their tubes tied, are at less risk, in general.
This is an issue we are seeing more and more often.
Whenever any imaging test is ordered, there is a chance that a completely unrelated abnormality may be found.
In your Mom’s case, while I do not have all the details on the MRI report, it sounds like the physicians are concerned about the thickness of the lining of her uterus as seen on MRI.
We know that if the lining of the uterus is 4 millimeters or less on ultrasound testing that the chance of cancer is almost zero.
My mother was diagnosed with uterine cancer at age 70.
She had no bleeding or pain, just some incontinence.
My GYN said that after 65 I don't need Pap or GYN exams.
My mother had a hysterectomy but years later developed and died from colon cancer.
This was before colonoscopies.
Medicare said colonoscopies are only necessary every 10 years after age 65.
With a family history, shouldn't testing be important?
While uterine and colon cancers are fairly common, the presence of both cancers in the same person raises the possibility that there could be a familial cancer syndrome.
Your doctor should consider referring you for genetic counseling and consideration of genetic testing for HNPCC (hereditary non polyposis colon cancer) syndrome, which, if present, could increase your risk of colon or uterine cancer.
What is vulvar cancer?
I have never heard of it.
Vulvar cancer is cancer that develops in the skin of the vulva.
Like other skin cancers, symptoms may include a visible lesion, itching and bleeding.
Some vulvar cancers are caused in part by the HPV virus, while others can develop in areas of chronic irritation or in people with other dermatologic problems such as lichen planus or lichen sclerosus.
Also, rarely, melanoma can develop in the vulvar area, even though that usually is not an area exposed to the sun.
Any new lesion or bleeding area in the vulva should always be evaluated by a gynecologist, and a biopsy should be done when appropriate.
Would you discuss hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) and if it is being looked at for female cancers?
Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) is a procedure during which we give chemotherapy directly into the abdominal cavity (or lung) at the time of surgery.
After removing all disease, we place tubes in the abdomen and circulate chemotherapy for 45 to 90 minutes.
The chemo is heated to 42 degrees C to improve its ability to penetrate tissue, and this is thought to increase the effectiveness of the drug.
Currently, we are offering this procedure for women with recurrent ovarian/tubal or peritoneal cancer, as well as for other GYN cancers.
My grandmother died from “female cancer” in the 1930s.
Granted, at that time that is all it would have been called, but is there any way to guess what type it was – uterine or ovarian?
I've had uterine cancer and I am just wondering if it was genetic or a bunch of risk factors.
We are often told that someone's relative had "female cancer."
It is impossible to know for sure which type it was.
In fact, the doctors back then may not have known themselves, and there were no good treatments available then for any of the possibilities.
If your family has a strong history of others with uterine or colon cancer, your doctor should consider sending you for genetic counseling for possible hereditary cancer syndrome testing.
We hope you found it to be helpful and informative.
What types of conditions make doctors consider a pregnancy “high risk”, and when should an OB consult a specialist?
I have not really ever been an athletic person, so is this something I can do while pregnant, or should I start before getting pregnant?
Can you give some suggestions of what I can do?
It’s OK that you have not been athletic before.
Ideally, it is best to start prior to pregnancy.
You can start with walking or jogging and build up as you go.
Many patients like to use machines such as an elliptical, and that would be good.
Swimming is also good, if you have access to a pool.
Getting started is often the hardest part, but it can make a huge difference for you.
I have ejected my sperm fully on my wife’s vaginal opening and fingered her for the last two days.
Within a minute, 80 percent of the sperm got inside.
Is there a chance of pregnancy?
She is in her ovulation period.
Wait a couple of weeks and see if she misses her period.
My wife is suffering from a brain tumor and its effect on her bone marrow.
No medicines are affecting her.
If she gets pregnant, then can be she fine?
Can she regenerate the bone marrow?
I would probably avoid getting pregnant until your wife’s medical condition is stable and her bone marrow is functioning.
Pregnancy can be a significant strain for the body, and can lead to worsening of her health if she is not well to begin with.
It is best to consult with your personal physician.
I have high blood pressure.
What are my options for continuing to manage my symptoms, and what effect will this have on my baby?
There are a number of medications that can be used safely to control your blood pressure during pregnancy, and your blood pressure should be followed closely by your doctor.
The risks from high blood pressure include smaller babies (growth restriction) and early delivery due to the development of preeclampsia, a pregnancy-related blood pressure complication.
I have PCOS (polycystic ovarian syndrome) and have finally been able to conceive.
Does polycystic ovary disease cause problems during pregnancy and if so what?
Most people with PCOS do well.
You may be at an increased risk for gestational diabetes and the development of preeclampsia.
Your doctor should screen for this and follow you closely.
I have IBS (irritable bowel syndrome) and have struggled with it for years; and, because of this, my diet is pretty restricted.
What can I do to make sure that my baby is getting all of the necessary nutrients that it needs while I'm pregnant?
Try to be as balanced with your diet as you can be.
Also, take a prenatal vitamin and a supplement with iron if you are anemic.
Most babies do fine, even with very restrictive diets.
I was diagnosed with systemic sclerosis (an autoimmune disorder) more than 13 years ago.
If I was to get pregnant, what problems should I look out for or possibly expect?
Should I see a high-risk pregnancy doctor and how soon after getting pregnant?
It depends on how you are doing with your condition and if you have issues with any of your organs such as your heart, blood vessels and kidneys.
I would see a high-risk pregnancy doctor prior to getting pregnant, so that we can help you have the best possible outcome.
A friend of mine had placenta previa, but I don’t quite understand what that means and how it happens.
Can you explain this?
It means that the placenta implants over the cervix.
This blocks the path for the baby to deliver and leads to an increased risk for bleeding, which can be quite serious.
Patients with this condition must be followed closely and delivered by cesarean section, as vaginal delivery is not possible due to the bleeding risk.
What are the symptoms?
What causes it and is there anything that puts women at a higher risk for developing preeclampsia?
Preeclampsia is a blood pressure complication that generally occurs in the third trimester.
It is characterized by high blood pressure, protein in the urine and swelling all over the body.
It is thought to result from the abnormal implantation of the placenta.
Common symptoms of preeclampsia include headache, blurry vision, spots in your visual field, swelling all over your body and sometimes upper abdominal pain.
Patients with pre-existing high blood pressure or other medical problems such as kidney disease are at greater risk.
Also a history of preeclampsia puts you at greater risk in a future pregnancy.
Can you do anything to prevent preeclampsia in a future pregnancy?
Yes, you can take low-dose aspirin during a future pregnancy to reduce the risk for recurrence.
This is particularly important if you had preeclampsia early in the prior pregnancy.
Can you do anything to prevent pre-term births?
If you went into labor on your own and delivered prematurely, taking weekly progesterone injections can decrease your risk to deliver prematurely again.
Also, in some cases, if there is an issue with your cervix, placement of a cerclage or suture to close the cervix can help.
