I would recommend the anti-inflammatory diet to help control the some of the pathology in the knee.
Has it been proven to work or is it a hoax?
It has a history of enormous clinical experience, but only recently have the rules of Western science been applied to it.
There are protocols for hypertension, diabetes, stress, urinary frequency and on and on.
So,  there would be no single treatment for diabetes, for example, but there would be general patterns.
Interestingly, the ancient Chinese physicians were forever going on about diet and exercise as well.
Your physician is right.
The use of Chinese herbals is a very complicated science in itself for the reason you give—not to mention toxicity.
Being a physician I am very wary of herbals, not because they don't work—they do, but they also come with side effects and contraindications.
I am using R-alpha lipoic acid for neuropathic pain in my lower legs that is from neurosarcoidosis.
I had been taking 100 mg daily, but found greater relief when I doubled this dose.
It is unclear if the significant improvements seen after three to five weeks of oral administration at a dosage of 600 mg or more daily are clinically relevant.
Is an oral dose of value, and how much is recommended?
However, I tend to be pragmatic and believe that the most important measure of a pain reliever is the response of the patient.
My only concern with oral medications are side effects and unintended consequences.
What is an anti-inflammatory diet?
An anti-inflammatory diet includes Do you have any literature (including what to have or avoid) for the anti-inflammatory diet?
There are numerous books in the popular culture that appear to be reasonable.
Are there recommended websites for anti-inflammatory diets?
I have no recommended websites and if you find one let me know.
Do you see meditation as helpful with chronic pain?
What do you think of ‘facing down’ the pain as in making the effort to feel into it?
Is there a technique suggested for this, say hypnotherapy?
One of these approaches may be more beneficial to a particular patient, depending on that patient's unique preference.
Meditation is one of the most underused effective therapies I am aware of.
Meditation techniques vary, and so far I haven't run into a bad one.
I have severe leg pain due , which I was told is due to my spine being out of alignment.
I went to a chiropractor three times a week for one month, with little to no results.
Did I give up too soon, or are there some things that can't be helped with 'alternative treatments'?
If the treatment, chiropractic or osteopathic doesn't show results after a reasonable period of time I would stop with that therapist.
You might want to try at least one more manual medicine person before you give up.
Before taking over-the-counter herbal supplements for pain, etc., how do you know which ones are safe?
How do you know which ones react with other medications?
Is there a place where you can go to get this kind of information?
These websites should provide you with the information you need on herbal supplements.
If I am interested in trying alternative therapies for pain management of my arthritis.
Can this be done through my regular physician or do I need to see a specialist?
Also, if I do need to see a specialist, do they work with my physician?
More physicians these days are including alternative practices in their treatment of patients.
Some, however, have no interest.
I would recommend discussing this with your physician, to see what he or she would recommend.
You may also consider utilizing many of the recommendations posted throughout this web chat.
The best predictor of success with egg freezing, and any infertility treatment for that matter, is the age of the woman.
Fertility rates progressively decline starting in the early 30s and the risks for miscarriage and birth defects rise.
That is the rationale for freezing eggs from women who are in their 20s and early 30s for later use when they are in their mid-to-late 30s or 40s.
There are several tests to check ovarian reserve, which is a reflection of the number of eggs remaining as well as response to stimulation with fertility drugs.
Women with low ovarian reserve can expect to recover fewer eggs per retrieval, but may still want to consider freezing eggs since there is a concern that they may go through menopause earlier.
I am on a career path where I want to wait to have children.
I am concerned with my prospect of fertility down the road.
Is cryopreservation come with an age limit—meaning is it better or more viable if a woman is younger?
Women should ideally bank their eggs in their 20s and early 30s to assure the best possibility of success.
How does endometriosis affect a woman's ability to freeze an egg and the likelihood that it will be useful later in life?
I am 28 years old and have been on Lupron®  depot (leuprolide acetate) for two years for the treatment of endometriosis.
Endometriosis may reduce the number of eggs available per retrieval cycle as well as reduce the chance for pregnancy after the eggs are thawed, fertilized and transferred.
I will be undergoing a double mastectomy and was wondering if I should look into this option for future fertility concerns.
I am mostly concerned about chemotherapy for the breast cancer and what it might do to my eggs.
The concern with chemotherapy is that it can lead to early menopause.
This was the original use for egg freezing.
Now that it is successful, it has been made available for women who want to electively freeze their eggs for social reasons.
After chemotherapy, the patient would need to wait until they have been in remission for several years before they could attempt to conceive.
The frozen eggs are not aging during this time.
If we determine this is something we would like to pursue, what is the first step—specifically for an out-of-state patient?
Prior to freezing eggs, the woman will need to meet with an infertility doctor to discuss the process and chances for success.
An in vitro fertilization (IVF) nurse will review how to administer the fertility drug injections (given like an insulin shot with a tiny needle under the skin) and the patient will need blood work for sexually transmitted diseases as required by the FDA.
Monitoring during the cycle with ultrasounds and blood work can be done locally.
Our IVF lab and storage facility is located in our Beachwood office.
Does overstimulation of the ovaries during a treatment cycle have any long-term negative effects?
I am wondering because this happened to me the last time I went through in vitro fertilization.
I am in the unexplained category of infertility.
Overstimulation of the ovaries usually occurs to a mild degree after using injectable fertility drugs.
Multiple cysts develop in the ovaries and resolve on their own within about two to four weeks.
In more severe cases, it can potentially be life-threatening with risks for kidney failure, fluid collection in the lungs and blood clots.
These patients require hospitalization until the condition resolves.
How many retrieval cycles are needed?
What are the long-term risks from fertility drugs?
About 10 to 20 eggs are typically recovered per cycle so two or possibly three cycles may be needed to get the desired 20 eggs in storage.
Millions of women have used these fertility drugs for over three decades with no risk beyond overstimulating the ovaries during the treatment cycle.
It must be kept in mind that being childless increases the risk for several cancers such as breast, ovarian and uterine.
Can you please describe how eggs are harvested?
Where is the ultrasound located?
The eggs are harvested using a vaginal ultrasound probe with a needle in a procedure room in the office.
There is no cutting or surgery involved.
The procedure takes about 15 minutes and is done under anesthesia, so there is no discomfort.
Patients are ready to leave within an hour.
Is egg freezing safe?
Can it cause any harm to my eggs?
Egg freezing is a fairly new treatment option so there are no long-term data, but there is no increase in miscarriage or birth defect rates.
The concern with trying to conceive later in reproductive life is that the risks for miscarriage and birth defects are dramatically higher, if the woman is able to conceive at all.
How many eggs need to be frozen in order to assure a woman that she can use them to conceive?
We recommend having about 20 eggs in storage.
Do most women freeze unfertilized or fertilized eggs?
Do some women do both?
If they have a partner they want to have a child with, women may freeze fertilized eggs.
Unfertilized egg freezing is used when there is no partner, and they don't want to use a sperm donor.
Some women going through in vitro fertilization will elect to freeze both fertilized and unfertilized eggs for religious reasons if they want to avoid the possibility of having excess frozen embryos that they wouldn't use.
What is entailed in thawing and using the eggs?
The lab thaws the eggs in the lab, inseminates them using the partner’s (or donor’s) sperm, then cultures the fertilized eggs (now called embryos) for three to five days before they are placed in the cavity of the uterus (womb) using a narrow, flexible catheter.
The transfer only takes about three minutes and feels like a Pap smear.
The embryologists thaw and fertilize the eggs then culture the embryos in the laboratory.
An infertility specialist physician then performs the embryo transfer.
What risks are involved in freezing, thawing, and utilizing the eggs?
The only risk to the woman is overstimulating her ovaries with the fertility drugs during the egg collection cycle.
In that case, the ovaries develop multiple cysts that may cause discomfort until they completely resolve on their own in a few days.
Very rarely, it can be severe enough to require hospitalization.
The only obstetrical risk is for multiple pregnancy, if more than one fertilized egg is transferred to the uterus.
What happens to a woman's unused eggs?
What are the costs associated with freezing eggs—both current and long term?
The cost to collect the eggs (including anesthesia), freeze them and store them for one year is $6600.
In addition, the medications required to stimulate multiple eggs to mature is approximately $2800 per cycle.
The annual storage fee beyond the first year is $400.
The cost to thaw and fertilize the eggs, and then culture and transfer the embryos (and freeze extra embryos) is approximately $3700.
Will insurance pay for any or all of the costs?
Insurance will typically pay for the ultrasounds and laboratory work for monitoring the cycles, since they are diagnostic tests.
However, they usually don’t cover anything else except the medications depending on the policy.
It is most likely caused by several factors, including genetics, subtle neuromuscular imbalance and some sort of asymmetrical growth.
Postural influence has very little if anything at all to do with the development of scoliosis.
What would be considered an atypical curve pattern?
The most common atypical curve pattern is a left thoracic curve.
The vast majority of thoracic curves are to the right.
Has there been any association shown between hypermobility syndrome and scoliosis?
I see that there is an association between Ehler-Danlos syndrome and scoliosis.
There are many causes of hypermobility.
Some are associated with an increased risk of scoliosis, but most are not.
Can scoliosis affect breathing with a 37-degree top curve?
My 14-year-old daughter is five foot and four inches tall and 92 lbs.
She runs cross country and dances.
She reports shortness of breath towards the end of races, dancing, etc.
She is otherwise healthy, with no medical history other than scoliosis.
A 37 degree curve is too small to affect lung function.
Curves really need to be in the 80 to 90 degree range to show demonstrable effects on lung function.
A more likely cause of shortness of breath in this case is exercised-induced asthma.
I am now 53 years old, and a mother of two.
(I continue to get the tingling occasionally.)
An orthopedic surgeon requested an MRI earlier this year that showed I have a 40 degree curvature.
He said that I have some arthritis and he recommended six weeks of physical therapy.
I am scheduled to be fitted with a brace next month, so that I can still do activities that I enjoy without ending up with major back pain.
How bad is a 40 degree curvature?
I look in the mirror and my back looks so crooked!
Also, is it possible that my curvature could get worse in future years and eventually affect my internal organs?
Sometimes I feel like my right hip is almost touching my rib cage.
In an adult we are much less concerned about the absolute magnitude of the curve than the symptoms that it causes.
In general a 40 degree curve is not considered to be a large curve and would not be an indication for surgery.
My scoliosis in the lower lumbar region is inflaming a nerve that travels to my hip and thigh.
My doctor has provided epidural shots that help, but tells me major surgery to straighten all my vertebrae is recommended.
Why don't we just concentrate on the nerve pain and fix the nerve?
People with scoliosis develop the same types of degenerative changes that occur in people with straight spines.
If your spine is balanced, in some cases a more limited procedure to address only the symptomatic level can be effective and avoid the more major scoliosis operation.
This idea is considered somewhat controversial, but growing evidence suggests that it is possible.
I would talk to your surgeon about this possibility.
As a former child sufferer, I can tell you that I didn't slouch and lose my posture to be difficult—I simply got tired of holding myself up all day.
My doctor gave me a brace to wear for one to two hours daily to just give me a break.
Core exercises help, but they take a long time and require lots of hard work to take effect.
With a 44-degree thoracic ‘S’ curve, how often would you recommend diagnostic examinations?
In some patients with scoliosis, when their lumbar spine degenerates, they find that they are no longer able to stand up straight.
This is not due to any weakness or problems with posture—this is due to gravity.
We call this being in positive sagittal balance.
Once someone is in positive sagittal balance, progression of the back part of the deformity is essentially inevitable.
Bracing in adults will eventually make the problem worse.
Braces that provide support weaken the muscles.
There is no documented indication for the use of a brace in an adult with scoliosis.
My 20-year-old daughter was diagnosed with scoliosis two years ago.
She has an upper and lower curve, but has no pain or mobility issues.
(She is very active with ballet and other types of dance.)
At her age, should we expect her curvature to be stable and not progress further?
Are there any nonsurgical methods to help prevent the curvature from getting worse?
It is likely that her curve will remain stable at this point in time.
If it progresses, it will progress at a very low rate of approximately one percent per year.
The first of these is cigarette smoking.
Smoking accelerates the normal degenerative change that we all get with aging that is also accelerated in people with lumbar scoliosis.
Smokers with scoliosis are at a much higher risk of progression as an adult.
Excessive weight gain—greater than 40 pounds—is also associated with increased risk for symptomatic progression.
What is also well established is that the more active a patient is, the less likely they are to develop problems in the future.
I would strongly encourage your daughter to remain active throughout her adult life.
Will severe congenital scoliosis shorten my life?
Scoliosis itself will not do so.
In some cases, the chest wall and lungs do not develop normally and this can lead to lung problems that may affect your health.
A lung specialist would be able to tell you if you have this type of problem.
I was diagnosed with scoliosis when I was 16 years old.
The reason was thought to be an early case of polio when I was five years old that caused a weakening of supporting muscles in the back area.
I walk an average of 12 km per day.
I have relatively little issue with the curvature, but find that my abdominal muscles do not tone up easily.
I am also constantly sore on my right side as this is the side I bow out on.
I assume that due to the curvature, which is not too bad, that there would be some compression or slight deformation of the abdominal cavity, especially as I get older.
My vertebrae seem to crack and snap a lot.
Scoliosis due to polio tends to behave a little bit differently than idiopathic scoliosis.
It may be that the abdominal pain you are getting is that your rib cage is now impinging on your pelvis.
Overall it sounds like your coping very well your scoliosis.
Scoliosis is one of the signs of my connective tissue disorder.
Since aortic dissection is also correlated, what is known about vertebrae tearing or causing abrasions of the aorta?
Scoliosis occurs in connective tissue disorders such as Marfan syndrome and Ehler-Danlos syndrome.
The aortic problems that occur in these diseases are due to problems in the connective tissue of the aorta itself.
The vertebra will never cause tearing or abrasions of the aorta.
Hardware placed in the vertebra to treat scoliosis very rarely can abrade the aorta.
Why would an MRI be needed for a child with scoliosis?
Most children who have scoliosis do not require an MRI scan.
Indications to order an MRI scan in a child with scoliosis include persistent pain, abnormal neurologic findings, presence of abnormal bone structure (congenital scoliosis), atypical curve pattern, and rapid progression of the curve.
MRI scans are ordered in these cases to look for abnormalities of the neurologic structures (cysts of fluid in the spinal cord called a syrinx, brainstem abnormalities or tethered cord) that may represent a cause for the curvature or pain.
What is best exercise to help with scoliosis, to ease the muscular tensions?
Any exercise program that strengthens the core muscles and builds flexibility is good and the presence of scoliosis.
I think that Pilates and, particularly, Pilates combined with yoga is one of the best ways of managing scoliosis with exercise.
You mention that exercise is important for adults with scoliosis.
Are there any particular exercises that children with scoliosis should do to strengthen core muscles?
Sit ups, crunches, yoga, and Pilates all contribute to core strength and general well-being.
They do not affect curve magnitude though.
I am 44 years old.
I have pain in my hip and lower back.
I am active, but feel like my trunk would be immobile if I didn't constantly stretch it.
I was told I had scoliosis and stenosis.
In some cases the scoliosis is due to the difference in leg lengths and can be corrected by putting a shoe lift in your shoes.
Otherwise your ongoing program of stretching exercises and remaining as active as you can are probably the best ways of managing your symptoms.
In idiopathic scoliosis—especially infantile—I understand that problems and deformities of the bones are ruled out.
I would believe this means the deformity must be caused by what is left and what holds those vertebrae together and upright—soft tissue, such as muscle, tendons and ligaments.
Yet—despite considerable anecdotal evidence that it can be effective—physical therapy that includes strength training and stretching those tissues is often ruled out in favor of things that tend to downgrade the quality of life such as bracing, casting and surgery.
Is there any reason or justification for that?
Early-onset scoliosis remains one of the most challenging problems we face in children's orthopaedics.
Physical therapy, which includes stretching and core strengthening, is helpful to promote general well-being and quality of life.
Unfortunately, these modalities have not been shown to change the natural history of scoliosis and are passed over for more proven methods.
Physical therapy can be used in these cases as well, and seem to be helpful in managing pain and promoting well-being.
They do not seem helpful in treating curve progression.
For idiopathic, infantile scoliosis, I keep hearing that core strengthening and stretching therapy have not been proven effective.
However, this could simply mean that it has never been adequately studied.
To your knowledge, has it ever been studied and has ever been proven to be ineffective?
It has been studied but not at a high enough level of evidence.
What are the different types of braces used to treat scoliosis?
There have been many types of braces that have been tried and studied.
The Milwaukee brace is a large metal brace that includes the neck and was recommended for wear 23 hours per day.
It is now largely historical because, quite frankly, no human wants to wear it.
If you look up a picture of it you will understand why.
In recent decades, the Boston brace and the Providence brace have become the 'gold standards'.
These are custom-made plastic-and-foam underarm braces that can be worn underneath clothing.
The Boston brace uses bony pressure points on the patient's ribs and pelvis to provide support and can be worn while upright.
A 16- to 18-hour-per-day bracing schedule can be accomplished with this as patients can wear it to school.
The Providence brace acts to 'unbend' the curve, and as such, is best worn while lying down.
The main advantage is that this is a nighttime only brace, and is not recommended during daytime.
Many patients prefer this as they do not have to wear it to school.
Both have been shown effective in slowing progression of curves in cases of idiopathic scoliosis.
If a child requires bracing to treat scoliosis, at what age would the bracing start and how long does it typically last?
The age at which brace treatment is initiated is variable, but in most cases of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis, it begins between the ages of 10 to 12 years old.
Candidates for bracing need to have enough growth remaining and a curve between 25 and 40 degrees.
It is important to remember that brace treatment can only slow the progression of the patient's curve—not correct it.
The endpoint is either progression to surgery or skeletal maturity—beyond which bracing is no longer effective.
Patients who are skeletally mature do not benefit from bracing.
My daughter was diagnosed with scoliosis at the age of seven years old, and has been wearing a Boston Brace for almost one year (she was braced right away with an S curve of 28 and 32 degrees).
What are her odds in eventually requiring back surgery at some point in her youth?
Is there any hope that she would not need surgery, and that the brace would prevent the curve from getting any larger?
Obviously, this has been a life-changing experience and hard on both of us.
Based on her age, she has what we call juvenile idiopathic scoliosis.
Children with this condition are more likely to require both nonsurgical (which you are already doing) and surgical intervention compared to those with the more common adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.
One cannot exactly predict the odds of your child needing surgery for scoliosis, but they are certainly higher than someone who develops a curve in the adolescent years.
Bracing is designed to slow or halt progression of the curve.
Use of the Boston Brace has been shown to do this when compared to individuals who are not braced.
There is always hope that a child will not require surgery.
However, the reality is that a significant number of patients with early-onset scoliosis ultimately require surgical stabilization.
The silver lining for those who do require it is that correction can be achieved.
Two of my kids have scoliosis.
My 14-year-old daughter has a 37-degree top curve and is skeletally immature.
My 11-year-old son has a 15-degree top curve.
My daughter has been in a brace for one and one half years now, but my son doesn’t wear a brace.
Are there any alternative treatments that have shown to be helpful?
How will her last growth spurt impact the curve?
Do you anticipate my son's curve to follow same path?
Bracing and surgery are the only two treatments that have been shown to have an effect on the curve.
Curves tend to progress most rapidly during the adolescent growth spurt.
Once this slows, so should the rate of progression.
Proper brace use should help in many cases as well—which it looks like you are doing.
It is impossible to predict the clinical course of your son's curve.
Remain vigilant and begin brace treatment if it is indicated.
It is the best thing we know of as a medical community to delay or avoid surgery.
My 17-year-son who is a high school wheelchair basketball player experienced a complete spinal cord injury at T12 in a car accident when he was eight years old.
He was diagnosed with scoliosis at the age of 16 years old.
He does wear a nighttime brace, but I'm not sure that it's helping slow the progression.
Are there other options to bracing for someone who is in a manual wheelchair?
If your son is now skeletally mature—meaning he is no longer growing—then there is no reason for him to continue to wear a brace at night.
Braces are used to prevent curve progression due to growth.
Scoliosis due to spinal cord injury tends to remain static after the end of growth.
For a curve that is more than 50 to 60 degrees, there is a reasonably high risk—but not inevitability—of progression.
At 40 degrees it is unlikely he will progress.
Brace wear during the day will lead to increased muscle atrophy and potential for increased pain.
Therefore, I would not recommend use of a brace during the day.
My 21-month-old son was born with VACTERL (vertebral, anal, cardiovascular, tracheo-esophageal fistula, renal and limb defects) syndrome.
He has three bone abnormalities in his spine and has a 32 degree curve.
He had a tethered cord that was corrected a year ago in July.
That seemed to help with the forward curve.
He is walking now, but leans to the right.
I take him to Nationwide Children’s Hospital, in Columbus, every six months to continue to monitor his progress.
What are some pediatric options for him?
He is not wearing a brace, he receives physical therapy once a week.
The doctors have told me not to stretch his neck as they feel it is the bone structure that causes him to lean his head sideways, but he can get to midline.
I wonder if a brace would assist him either for his neck and/or back.
He is an amazing little boy and is much tougher than his twin brother!
What a fantastic story.
I am glad he is doing so well.
Patients with VACTERL syndrome typically have defined bony abnormalities of the vertebrae, which is called congenital scoliosis.
Unfortunately, bracing has not been shown to be effective at changing the natural history of curve progression in patients with congenital scoliosis.
There are some soft-sided braces and orthoses that can assist with positioning if needed.
I would consult with your treating physician or therapist for specifics on your son's case.
I wish you the best of luck!
There are many reasons for donor site pain—some of which are treated bone and some of which are not.
Depending on the incision used when taking bone for bone graft, this can damage small nerves leading to a painful neuroma.
Occasionally, these neuromas can be removed with good relief of the donor site pain.
This is a procedure that is widely available.
Why is it necessary to be awake during facet injections?
If the needle is too close to the nerve, the person having the injection will feel pain.
That way the person doing the injection will know not to inject anything in that position.
If you were asleep, the injection could damage the nerve.
My daughter, who is now 26 years old, was diagnosed at the age of 10 years old with idiopathic scoliosis.
She had about a 21-degree curvature which progressed to 26 degrees.
Eventually she was prescribed a brace to wear at night.
Over time her scoliosis progressed to 37 degrees at the age of 17 years old.
A specialist in Houston said that it was pointless for her to wear the brace.
He said that her curvature would probably stabilize now that she had finally reached her full adult height.
He did not recommend surgery or rods since she was a dancer and needed her flexibility.
She had yearly x-rays until she was about 22 years old.
She has not had any further follow up since.
She only experiences occasional, mild back pain.
Her hips are definitely crooked with her right hip higher than her left hip.
Should she be monitored and undergo yearly x-rays, or has she stabilized?
Do you recommend rods for her back?
Would this interfere with yoga and other exercises?
Should she just leave it alone?
Once someone is skeletally mature, curves—if they are going to progress—change at a rate of about 1 degree per year.
The technique for measuring the magnitude of the curve is only accurate to about 5 degrees.
Therefore, it does not make a lot of sense to get an annual x-ray to follow the curve.
I would suggest a follow-up x-ray every three to five years unless symptoms change.
Is there a treatment or surgery that can fix scoliosis as it affects the cervical area in an adult?
What is the chance of having permanent pain due to the surgery when there was only a cosmetic problem with the scoliosis, but no pain before surgery?
(My husband has chronic donor site pain from a spinal fusion 10 years ago.
He wishes he'd never had surgery.)
Many of the surgical techniques used in the thoracic and lumbar spines can also be used in the cervical spine.
It would depend on the nature of the scoliosis.
If there is no pain involved and the cosmetic appearance is acceptable, I would not recommend any surgery at all.
Surgery is done to decrease pain and improve function.
Occasionally, in the cervical spine for certain types of problems, we'll also do surgery to decompress the spinal cord.
However, again, we do not perform this in somebody who has no symptoms.
My teenage daughter was recently diagnosed with idiopathic scoliosis with a 53 degree curvature of the thoracic area.
The orthopedic specialist is recommending a spinal fusion procedure within the next 12 months to correct the curvature, as she is still developing.
Is spinal fusion the best procedure?
What is a realistic length of recovery and what is the best postoperative therapy?
What are the physical limitations or restrictions, if any?
Spine fusion surgery is likely the best option for her.
At 53 degrees there is a high likelihood that her curve will continue to progress throughout her adult life, which is the main reason scoliosis is treated.
The timing is largely up to you and your daughter.
If she is growing rapidly, she may be at risk for more rapid progression in the next 12 months.
Otherwise, it could be done at a later convenient time.
The length of recovery is highly variable between physician and center.
It also depends on the extent of the curve and the levels that are involved or fused.
A typical fusion for a right thoracic curve at our center would involve a four- to five- day hospital stay, and no sports or impact activities for six months.
If all goes according to plan, I let patients return to full activities as tolerated—except for tackle football and true collision sports—at 6 months after surgery.
Therapy is typically not required until that time as the goal is to obtain a solid fusion.
I encourage patients to do a lot of normal walking, which is all that is necessary.
I limit heavy lifting, bending and twisting until that time.
Most patients feel up to returning to school after four weeks (if surgery is done during the school year) Of course, all surgeons have different recommendations and one should follow his or her guidelines.
I am a woman over 60 years old with congenital scoliosis.
My surgeries include 11 fusions—both thoracic and lumbar.
I also had hardware repair on a clamp placed at fusion surgery and three facet joint injections.
Currently, my lower back is starting to affect my legs and walking is difficult.
My surgeon is willing to perform another surgery if tests reveal a need.
I am very hesitant to have another surgery.
In your opinion are multiple spine surgeries safe for someone with my history and age?
Except for my back I am in relatively good health.
The decision to undergo surgery is always a balance between potential risk and benefit.
Certainly in someone with multiple previous surgeries, the risks are somewhat higher.
Surgery is, however, relatively routine at centers specializing in deformity surgery when symptoms warrant intervention and the patient is healthy enough to undergo the surgery.
The key in this decision-making process is to have a surgeon who devotes a significant amount of his practice to revision deformity surgery.
I am a 55-year-old female.
My last MRI shows moderate levoscoliosis (side-to-side scoliosis) centered about L2 and grade III isthmic spondylolisthesis of L5 in relation to S1.
There is severe left foraminal stenosis at L5-S1.
I am experiencing leg pain as a result.
First, what is moderate scoliosis and does it get worse?
Second, if a spinal fusion to address the spondylolisthesis is performed, will the scoliosis need to be fused as well?
Also, is there any chance that minimally invasive surgery can be performed?
There are a number of minimally invasive options that can be used to treat both the spondylolisthesis and, if necessary, the scoliosis.
The treatment of scoliosis when associated with another spinal problem is somewhat controversial.
There is, however, a growing body of evidence that suggests treating the primary symptomatic problem.
In your case, this is the spondylolisthesis, and following the scoliosis is a very good option as well.
If the curve becomes a problem, you have not burned any bridges by treating the symptomatic problem.
Additionally, you may avoid a much bigger operation that you did not need by pursuing the more limited surgery.
How has treatment of scoliosis in children changed historically?
What is the thinking about rods that were surgically implanted in decades past?
Finally, how has the health of the patient progressed over years?
The surgical treatment of scoliosis has evolved significantly.
Prior to the availability of metal instrumentation, patients were placed in a corrective body cast and fusion surgery was performed through a hole cut in the back of the cast.
Patients were maintained in the cast for six to 12 months until fusion was obtained.
Earlier generation rods and hooks worked well to provide modest correction and curve stabilization.
Many remain implanted in patients and are quiescent, requiring no action if patients are symptom free.
Newer generation metals and pedicle screws provide significantly more rigidity and corrective power.
Ultimately, patients who have successful balanced fusions should stay stable for a lifetime without rod removal.
I am a 58-year-old female.
In 1967, at the age of 12 years old, I had scoliosis surgery.
At that time it consisted of insertion of Harrington rods and nine months in a partial-to-full body cast.
I now have spinal stenosis and degenerative disc disease, but neither is severe yet.
Could these issues be related to the scoliosis surgery and rods?
Can anything be done other than muscle relaxers or trigger point injections?
Degeneration of the lumbar discs and the development of spinal stenosis is a normal phenomenon of aging.
However, patients who had surgery with Harrington rods—especially if the bottom end of the rods is at the L3 or L4 level—tend to develop a little bit more degeneration.
The first line of treatment is the same as it would be in someone without previous surgery, and consists of a program of core-strengthening exercises.
