Synvisc®  is the only product with a one-time injection; most of the others require 3 injections.
You say you do these injections with ultrasound in your practice.
What is time period these will last, and do they deteriorate the joint?
It depends what is injected--most commonly it is a corticosteroid (cortisone-type medicine).
Over-use of this medicine can cause joint damage, but injections can usually be repeated every 3 months (and they usually last 2 to 3 months).
The viscosupplements (joint fluid) injections are also given with ultrasound guidance.
They do not damage the joints, but usually are too expensive to repeat more than once every 6 months.
Corticosteroids also are more effective for inflammatory arthritis or bursitis.
When do you think stem cell therapy will be available for knee joint treatment?
I'm not familiar with stem cell treatments for knee arthritis, but there is good work being done on cartilage transplantation.
Would you briefly describe knee cartilage transplantation?
This is done with two different techniques.
In Mosaicplasty, cartilage plugs are harvested from a different (non-weight bearing) portion of the joint and transplanted to the affected area.
In the other technique (chondrocyte transplant), cartilage cells are harvested and then grown in a laboratory to be implanted at a later date.
Mosaicplasty is more common due to expense.
I’m 75 years old; I fell many times on ice, cement, etc., when I was young.
About 5 years ago I got arthritis in my right knee cap only; I took 5 shots of medicine that didn’t work.
Now I take cortisone shots 3 to 4 months a year.
I have been told that to correct my problem I must have a complete knee replacement.
For patellofemoral (kneecap) arthritis, total knee replacement is almost always necessary--usually because it co-exists with arthritis in rest of the joint.
For arthritis/loss of cartilage in knee, how often and how long can a person get injections?
What do you recommend for knee pain at night?
This really depends on the diagnosis.
For osteoarthritis, pre-medication with a long-acting medicine is helpful.
I usually recommended naproxen (Aleve® ) or extended-release acetaminophen (Tylenol®  8-hour).
I suggest getting a diagnosis first, however!
Should I buy a certain kind of bed mattress and pillows to help with back pain?
I recommend a firm mattress, usually with a soft top-cover (for comfort).
I've treated two mattress salesmen with low back pain who have both recommended the name-brand mattresses.
I suggest trying a friend or family member's bed for a few nights to "test-drive" the mattress.
Get a money-back guarantee!
Please explain arthritis of the spine; is it serious or just age-related?
Most spine arthritis is age-related.
Specifically known as facet joint osteoarthritis, it is usually mild and manageable with exercise and medications.
My left leg is ½ inch longer due to a total hip replacement Will I have to have a right hip replacement to correct this problem?
The right side hurts always due to the leg difference.
I recommend trying a heel lift (or a lift built into the whole sole of the shoe).
Usually we use a lift about 1/2 the size of the discrepancy.
I like the "Adjust-A-Lift" heel insert (available over the counter or online), as you can choose how much lift to add.
Hip replacement is not recommended unless there is significant arthritis in the hip.
Is there a best exercise for hip pain?
I'd consult with a physical therapist.
In most hip conditions, the hip abductors (gluteals) get weak, so they should be strengthened.
I have been advised to consider a hip replacement but also have some pain in the other hip and back area.
Will physical therapy do any damage?
Physical therapy is always worth a try, but many of my patients have exacerbations of pain from hip arthritis.
Core/abdominal exercises are important for both conditions, but be wary of anything that puts stress through the hip joint, especially in a weight-bearing position.
Do you believe glucosamine and/or chondroitin supplements are of any benefit to arthritis sufferers?
I think they work better for mild-to-moderate arthritis, but they take 1 to 2 months to take effect.
Glucosamine hydrochloride has not been studied as much and should probably be combined with chondroitin sulfate.
What is the current state of biologic treatments, or other treatments that are on the horizon?
Because of my low immune system, I'm wary of going on a biologic.
There are a number of new ones on the horizon.
It often comes down to a risk-benefit analysis and long discussion with your rheumatologist.
With close monitoring, they are usually safe (relative to the risk of the disease).
How long can a patient tolerate methotrexate if it is helpful?
Once the liver becomes affected, will other treatments also harm the liver?
Will eating certain foods stop the progression of RA?
Methotrexate can be tolerated for a number of years.
Patients can often return to treatment after a brief “drug holiday.”
I am not aware of dietary measures that can stop RA.
I would defer this to a rheumatologist.
How long can one be on a regimen of ibuprofen?
What pain medication do you recommend?
Ibuprofen may cause stomach ulcers.
It should be limited to as brief a time as possible.
However, many patients take ibuprofen for many years without side effects.
I often recommend combining low-dose ibuprofen with acetaminophen.
I also recommend taking a medication to protect the stomach lining, such as omeprazole, if long-term ibuprofen treatment is needed.
What can be done if you were told you have arthritis of the neck?
Arthritis of the neck is usually manageable with over-the-counter medications, heat or ice, and activity modification.
Posture is the most important factor related to activity.
Physical therapy can sometimes reinforce good posture.
If neck pain continues to be severe, injections into the arthritic joints are often helpful.
I have lupus and rheumatoid arthritis.
I tried working part time from home and couldn't do it.
Do you think these conditions could cause disability?
Some days I can do more; other days I can't do much of anything.
Yes, but before applying for disability you should be under maximal treatment.
I would suggest consulting with another rheumatologist, preferably at a major medical center.
I have migratory joint pain and bursitis.
I have RA and lupus.
Why is it migratory?
Everything I read says RA is usually symmetrical.
Yes, rheumatoid arthritis is usually symmetrical.
I would suggest confirming the diagnosis with another rheumatologist.
Lupus itself may also cause joint pains, or you may have osteoarthritis as well.
How can you tell the difference between arthritis and bursitis in the shoulder or a combination of both?
In the shoulder, arthritis and bursitis often co-exist.
Along with them, tendonitis also can co-exist.
Arthritis pain will often improve after a few minutes of use, whereas bursitis/tendonitis may worsen.
An MRI or ultrasound may help differentiate them.
An ultrasound or X-ray (fluoroscopy) guided injection is the "gold standard" for diagnosis.
Fortunately, the treatment is nearly the same for all of them and usually starts with physical therapy.
Shoulder arthritis: please speak to pain radiating down arm, especially large arm muscle.
Radiating pain is very common from shoulder arthritis--it is often misdiagnosed as a pinched nerve in the cervical spine.
This more commonly comes from arthritis involving the ball and socket portion of the joint.
How does the doctor determine if the pain is from arthritis or Sjogren’s syndrome?
Sjogren’s syndrome is often associated with joint pain.
Do you recommend Celebrex®  (celecoxib) as an anti-inflammatory medication?
Yes, it is one of my favorite medications to prescribe, but you should check on insurance coverage.
My 26-year-old daughter was diagnosed with RA last year.
How often should she see her rheumatologist?
What happens if she occasionally forgets her methotrexate?
This depends on how well her arthritis is controlled.
It needs to be determined by her rheumatologist.
Missing a few doses of methotrexate may predispose her to relapse.
I have RA, am taking methotrexate, and my bones are fracturing; is this from the drug?
The disease itself, or corticosteroids, are more likely to cause bone loss and fracture.
I'm a 46-year-old male with RA.
I also have Morton's neuroma in my right foot, which makes walking additionally painful.
What are some ways to get exercise that don't involve using my foot?
I'd recommend getting treatment for the neuroma so you can walk more comfortably - cortisone injection, shoe inserts, or surgery all helpful.
Meanwhile, you should try swimming.
Bicycling may also be tolerable.
With severe RA, when do you determine that joint replacement will not help due to the aggressive RA progression?
Joint replacement is almost always possible in RA.
If there is severe bony erosion or osteoporosis, it may be risky.
The arthritis should be in maximal control by medical management prior to surgery.
This is a difficult decision, best done jointly with your rheumatologist and surgeon.
Once you have bone erosion, can that damage be reversed?
Probably not, although the joints can fill small defects with scar tissue.
Small erosions often do not cause pain once the disease is under control.
Visit our Group Page often to interact with our physicians, nurses and embryologists as they share the latest information on infertility diagnoses, treatments and procedures.
Engage with other patients facing the same challenges.
Feel free to invite your family and friends to join our discussion too.
Are different packages offered?
The cost of one IVF cycle from start to finish is approximately $15,000 if your insurance plan covered nothing at all.
Usually that is not the case; they cover pieces of the work-up.
We have been working on different packages that should be available in the very near future.
Does the cost of the IVF cycle include prescriptions and/or the intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)?
One IVF cycle is approximately $15,000 if your insurance covered nothing at all.
That does include the drugs and ICSI.
Most insurance companies do cover bits and pieces of the testing.
Is there somewhere on the Intranet that we can find pricing information/financial options?
I would be happy to email you an IVF booklet with the cost breakdown.
Please send me your email address to clappm@ccf.org, and I will forward the booklet.
What is the cost of IVF if a donor is needed?
In the case that I would need IVF, do I need to put a large sum of money down?
The prepayment is $9,417, and medication is needed from the pharmacy, which is approximately $2,800.
We do offer MAP loans through US Bank and the ARC infertility loans.
What is the cost for IVF with an egg donor?
What portion is for the donor and what portion is for the recipient?
Are there programs to help offset cost and how are they administered?
Most of this money will go for the donor's services.
Her medications are separate and average $2,500.
The only part of the prepayment that is for the recipient is embryo transfer - approximately $1,762.
My husband and I have been doing Clomid®  (clomiphene) treatments for years on and off--I will be 39 in November--I am ready to maybe do IVF--should I try the fertility shots first or just do the IVF?
Clomid is only used for 6 cycles, as pregnancy is unlikely with prolonged treatment.
Assuming that there are no other infertility problems to specifically treat, the other options for unexplained infertility are to perform intrauterine insemination with either Clomid or injectable FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) versus going directly to IVF.
Since you are already 39 with long standing infertility, I would recommend being more aggressive and skipping the Clomid insemination step.
Is there any financial help available for IVF patients?
Approximate cost of a Frozen Embryo Transfer is $2,000, which includes the ultrasound that is needed.
How long is a typical IVF cycle?
A typical IVF cycle starts with daily injections of Lupron®  (leuprolide) to suppress the pituitary gland, beginning 21 days after the start of a period.
This is to reduce the risk of ovulating prior to the egg collection.
After 10 to 14 days, injections of FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) are added.
The patients are monitored every few days with ultrasounds of the ovaries and blood estrogen levels.
The dose is adjusted based on these results and a final injection of hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin) is given to bring about complete egg maturation.
The eggs are collected nonsurgically 36 hours later, and the fertilized eggs are transferred to the uterus 3 to 5 days after that.
I found on a website that CCF offers something called "Partnership for Families" that helps with IVF; is it still available?
We do not have a Partnership Program anymore, but we do have a new program that is similar to that called Harboring Hope.
You pay for one IVF on your own and then apply for the Harboring Hope program for a free second cycle.
Is there contact info on Harboring Hope?
I Googled it and nothing came up.
I'd like to look into it.
The application to apply for funding will be available soon.
Can I be monitored in the Columbus area?
If so, how do I do this?
We do have a monitoring site in Columbus.
Our IVF nurses can make those arrangements.
What is the Clinic's success rate with IVF for individuals over 40?
The live birth rate per egg retrieval for women 41-42 is 10.2% and 8% for patients over 42.
How many IVF treatments should you have before choosing to go with a surrogate?
IVF may not be successful due to either compromised embryo quality or the lining of the uterus may not be optimally prepared for implantation.
Unfortunately, there are no clinical tests for either so there is no clear explanation when IVF fails.
A gestational carrier is usually considered in cases where the uterus is absent or the cavity is severely scarred, or the woman has medical conditions where pregnancy is a health risk.
A donor egg may be a better option than a gestational carrier following multiple unsuccessful IVF cycles.
Clearly, a gestational carrier won't improve the chances if the problem is due to poor egg quality.
At what point do you decide to do IVF?
There can be many reasons to think of moving to IVF- it depends on your age, testing of your ovarian reserve (capacity of the ovary to produce fertilizable eggs), and history of prior treatments.
It also depends on your partner's sperm test, because some patients require IVF for male-related problems.
In the end, it will be an individualized decision based on many factors including whether you are ready for the time, cost, and schedule required to do an IVF cycle.
What is the cost of an IUI (intrauterine insemination)?
The cost of an insemination is $452.
That includes the sperm wash and insemination.
Will there be any packages available for superovulation/IUI?
No, the packages are geared towards IVF.
What is the cost of "superovulation" with Follistim®  (follicle stimulating hormone)?
Does CCF offer a discount to employees?
Approximate cost of medication is $800, 3 ultrasound @ $135 each, 3 office visits @ $30 each, and insemination $200 for CCF employees.
When it comes to diabetes and fertility...is it the insulin you take that causes the infertility or the natural insulin the body produces?
How is insulin resistance associated with infertility?
Some women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) have insulin resistance.
This means that their bodies are relatively resistant to the insulin that they produce, so to keep their blood sugar in the normal range, they have to compensate by making more insulin.
The elevated insulin doesn't cause infertility, but rather not ovulating due to having PCOS.
I have PCOS and have done 5 rounds of Clomid, 2 rounds of Femara®  (letrozole) and a round of Femara with Menopur®  (menotropins for injection), none of which have caused ovulation, what would my next option be and would it be wise to do an IUI or try IVF?
Ovulation induction for PCOS patients may occasionally be difficult and several medication protocols may have to be tried to find one that works.
An outpatient laparoscopic procedure with the unfortunate name of "ovarian drilling" may enable Clomid-resistant women to either ovulate on their own or with the addition of Clomid.
It can also reduce the higher miscarriage rate associated with PCOS, as well as improve acne and abnormal hair growth.
Can a woman with PCOS and insulin resistance have a successful pregnancy?
Although there are more difficulties associated with getting pregnant and the pregnancy itself, it certainly is a common situation for our PCOS patients and, under the care of a fertility specialist and possibly later a high risk obstetrician, is a manageable problem.
Is the Clinic involved with ARC (Advanced Reproductive Care, Inc.) or some other agency that would help with refunding monies if the procedure does not work?
Yes, we have been involved with ARC for many years.
They are a good company to work with.
Can you explain the process with ARC?
ARC sells packages to patients, 1 cycle, 2 cycle and 3 cycles.
All the packages include a free frozen embryo transfer (a $1,762 value).
They also sell money back guarantees if cycles fail.
My insurance only covers diagnostics and not treatments, are there payment options available once a diagnosis has been given?
Is there a CCF employee discount for IUI or IVF?
IUI is usually $452 and for an employee it is $200.
An IVF cycle is usually $9,417, not including ultrasounds, but employees pay $4450, which includes the ultrasounds and office visits.
For CCF employees, how much are each of the estradiol blood draws?
Each estradiol level is $99.
Is the initial consultation visit covered by CCF insurance?
It depends on how the diagnosis is coded as determined by the physician.
Is there a CCF employee discount for semen analysis?
Or is it covered by the CCF employee health plan?
There is no discount for a semen analysis.
I am not sure if our CCF insurance is paying for it these days.
They are really becoming very strict on what they cover.
What is the cost/discount for an employee for IVF with and egg donor?
Donor cost and the recipient cost?
There are no employee discounts for the oocyte donor program.
Most of the charges are for the oocyte donor, and they do not receive a discount.
The cost is approx $16,000 for medical and $10,000 for oocyte donor agency.
What tests are recommended for those suffering multiple miscarriages?
There are several potential underlying causes for recurrent miscarriage, though in the majority of cases, no cause is found.
The causes and tests include Do you offer shared cycle programs, and if so, how often are they used?
Yes, we do offer a Shared Oocyte Program, but it is not used that much anymore.
Most recipients want to select their donors carefully and will pay the extra money to keep all the oocytes.
The Shared Program divides the oocytes.
What determines the best option for each person for fertility treatment?
There is often no "best" option.
Factors to consider are the woman's age, duration of infertility, infertility factors, prior treatments, risks, and costs.
We will have a consultation with the couple to review the advantages and disadvantages of all of the options so that they can make an informed decision.
If you have an infertility diagnosis, but are blessed with a spontaneous pregnancy, do you need to redo all diagnostic testing in order to be eligible for fertility treatment should you desire another child?
You do not have to repeat the testing if it is within the last year.
Can the use of generic drugs as opposed to brand drugs (levothyroxine for Synthroid®  , for example) affect the ability to achieve pregnancy?
We do not believe that generic medications (e.g., synthroid) would have a significant impact on conception rates; you would just need to make sure that you are taking the correct dose under the supervision of your physician.
How does HPV (human papillomavirus) affect infertility?
HPV doesn't affect fertility.
Does CCF have a surrogate program?
What are the costs involved?
Yes, we have a surrogate host program.
The medical portion for the treatment would be approximately $16,000.
Is it possible that something could happen with a previous pregnancy that would cause secondary infertility?
Yes, that is a possibility.
We recommend that patients with secondary infertility come for a visit to be evaluated for these types of concerns.
Maggie, Are you available to meet with patients prior to under-going treatment to determine roughly the out-of-pocket expense expected?
How much of an impact does having a TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone) level above 2 or 3 (and knowing that the ideal range is between 1 and 2 for conception) have on becoming pregnant and maintaining the pregnancy?
Having an elevated TSH can impact chances for becoming pregnant, although in the range you mentioned it depends on the cutoff for the specific lab that did the test (they vary from lab to lab).
Having an elevated TSH, or being hypothyroid, during a pregnancy can also affect the pregnancy itself if not regulated.
Many practitioners increase the dose of synthroid immediately upon starting a pregnancy due to increased demands as pregnancy progresses.
If taking Clomid, are you limited on your activities?
Is running & exercise still okay?
Or do you risk twisting or putting stress on the ovaries?
It depends where you are in your cycle as well as your ovaries’ response to Clomid.
The risk of twisting an ovary (torsion) is higher when the follicles that develop on the ovary are large or numerous (usually around the time of ovulation).
However, if you produce one follicle, your risk is probably the same as in a non-Clomid month.
Moderate exercise is always okay, and we always tell patients to be careful as regards any sudden-onset lower abdominal pain.
What are the chances of conceiving after having a blockage removed?
It depends on many factors such as the nature of the blockage and how it was fixed (I'm assuming you mean a blockage in the tube).
What caused the blockage and if it might recur (such as endometriosis).
Whether there are other fertility factors at play such as a male factor, lack of ovulation, your age, etc...
So it's hard to give a precise estimate.
If that was the only fertility issue and it was only affecting one tube, your chances of conception should approach those of an average woman your age.
I am 33 years old, and my husband and I have been trying to get pregnant for 2 years.
How do you determine what is causing my infertility problem?
After two years of trying, I think you would benefit from a fertility evaluation.
Depending on the results of those basic tests, we would move on to next steps in your evaluation based on your specific situation.
My doctor told me that I have endometriosis and that I may have difficulties getting pregnant.
I am 29 years old and getting married this year.
Should we talk to a fertility doctor now?
This depends on the severity of your endometriosis.
At the age of 29 (as long as no one in your family had premature menopause), I would recommend trying to conceive for 6 months and then coming to speak with a specialist if you have no success after that.
Many patients with endometriosis are able to become pregnant on their own.
43771 to speak with a Health Educator.
We would be happy to help you.
Let us know if you want us to let you know about future web chat events!
Some participants have asked about upcoming web chat topics.
What specific things do you think are most important to look for when choosing a hospital for delivery of your baby?
Do you recommend having a written birth plan (and if so, what should be included)?When choosing a hospital to deliver your baby, I would suggest you see them both and ask your provider which one they prefer.
There are unforeseen complications at times and on-site specialists may help you make your decision.
I'm currently 26 weeks pregnant and plan to deliver at Hillcrest Hospital.
We live in Wadsworth, so my husband was hoping to stay with me and the baby at the hospital.
Are there accommodations at Hillcrest Hospital for my husband to stay with us?I can assure you that the staff will do everything possible to accommodate your needs to keep you and your husband together for your postpartum stay.
I've only recently found out that I am pregnant.
I am just starting to look into different birthing methods.
Can you go over some of the methods and advantages and disadvantages?First, congratulations on your newly discovered conception!
It's fun to think about all the options ahead of you for labor and delivery.
Learn what you can about pain management (with or without medication), which can include hypnotherapy, massage, etc.
You can look into water birth or the option of an epidural.
A birth plan is nice, but, remember, we are all looking to have the same outcome—a happy, healthy baby and mom!
Whichever route you chose, keep an open mind!
If you were pressed, what birthing method do you recommend as the best?I'm not sure what you mean by birthing method.
However, my first recommendation is to let labor start on its own.
Try to avoid induction unless it is medically necessary.
Some women prefer to be at home or in a shower during their labor.
Once you have checked into the hospital, if the baby is checked out and OK and you are doing fine, you may be able to still walk around or get into the shower at the hospital.
We have pain medication available if needed, either through an intravenous route or epidural route.
Both can be effective depending on the circumstances.
I would only recommend a cesarean section if indicated by your labor course, or perhaps any unforeseen concerns with the baby's tolerance to labor.
We generally try to avoid an episiotomy, vacuum- or forceps-assisted delivery.
However, many skilled obstetricians can safely deliver a baby with some help.
My motto is, "Mother Nature has been doing this a lot longer than me.”
So, let labor start on its own if at all possible and you will do great.
I discussed with my OB (obstetrician) that I wouldn't want students or other interns in my room when I am in labor or delivering.
She mentioned that sometimes they still come over.
Is there a way to ask that students or interns not be allowed?
Do I have to do that in advance?It is important to educate students and interns at all stages of their career development.
However, you absolutely have a choice as to whether or not you will allow a student at the time of your labor and delivery.
You can inform the nurse when you arrive, or your OB provider.
Your wishes will be supported either way.
Best wishes to you!!
How often will I have nurses coming over to check on me and the baby?That depends on your needs!
The nursing staff will initially assess how you are doing and periodically check on you every hour or so.
If you are doing well and would like less attention, please feel free to ask.
I am 37 weeks pregnant, and getting very anxious about my labor experience.
I am opting for a medicated free birth experience, but I am keeping an open mind for the whole process.
I would like to know that if something happens to me, would my husband be able to do the skin-to-skin bonding with our baby?Always keep an open mind!
If you have never experienced labor before, we want you to remember that our goals are the same as yours—a healthy baby and a healthy mom.
And, yes, generally if you are not able to provide skin-to-skin contact, your husband likely will be able to do so.
Also, I would like to know about the cord blood bank.
My OB (obstetrician) mentioned that it depends on the time when I deliver for that to happen.
Is this true, or would I be able to schedule this ahead of time?
I am not going for the private bank.
There are many private cord blood banking companies and you can contact them ahead of time to get a kit to bring to the hospital.
The public cord blood banking is also an option most days and nights, and someone will discuss that with you when you arrive at the hospital.
You may find out more information on their website.
There was also a chat a couple of weeks ago discussing cord blood banking.
My doctor said that I should have an epidural with the induction.
I don't want one.
Inductions should only be recommended if medically indicated.
The labor you experience at the time of an induction can be more painful.
However, many women are able to achieve natural childbirth even if they do need an induction.
I would suggest you wait and see how you feel.
An epidural is not essential.
I prefer a natural delivery, and would like to deliver in the position of my choice.
Can I request that of my physician, or do I have to deliver lying down with my legs up?
How do I know if the baby is in danger, or if the physician just wants to get the delivery over with?There are many positions that a mom can be in for the delivery of her child.
Your provider may want to monitor the baby through the birth process, but this can often be achieved while you are squatting or standing.
If there is concern about the size of the baby or the position of the baby, you may need to change your position, but you should feel free to let your wishes be known.
Good luck to you!
What are your thoughts on scheduled c-sections (cesarean)?
My first baby was an unexpected c-section at 41 weeks.
I was so uncomfortable at the end of the pregnancy.
If I am going to have another c-section anyways, I'd rather schedule it around 37 or 38 weeks, so I am not so big and uncomfortable!I would not recommend an elective schedule cesarean section before 39 completed weeks.
While I realize that the last few weeks of pregnancy can be uncomfortable, it is an important time for newborn brain and lung development.
Hang in there for those few extra weeks, it's best for your baby!
What is your opinion on have siblings being present at the birth?That would depend on the age and maturity of the sibling.
Some are very nervous if they see their mom in pain or if there is a lot of bleeding.
I have had some siblings present though, and it was a beautiful experience for all!
You can also peruse the childbirth education classes for a sibling class.
I've been reading a lot about skin-to-skin contact and kangaroo care.
I was really excited about this special bonding time, but then found out I would be having a c-section (due to some health issues).
I am so bummed!
Is there anyway I can still do kangaroo care?Kangaroo care is wonderful, and the good news is that even if you are not able to provide that in the first 30 minutes, your support person can do skin-to-skin contact.
Many spouses have found this to be a wonderful experience and it helps with their ability to bond with the baby as well.
You can certainly have the opportunity to provide skin to skin contact in a short time after birth.
This contact has been shown to help the baby transition into the ‘world outside of the womb’ by helping maintain temperature regulation, heart rate stability and respiratory stability.
So, the good news is that you or your partner can still provide kangaroo care!
I am 32 weeks pregnant, and already a mom to a 2-year-old girl.
I've started preparing for my stay in the hospital.
I've been hearing from my friends and even from my OB (obstetrician) that my hospital wants all babies to stay in the room with parents at all times!
I imagine I'll be exhausted and this will be a good time to catch up on my sleep before going home to a newborn and a toddler!
First, congratulations on your pregnancy!
I am sure that you are getting excited to bring home a new baby.
I am not sure whether you breastfed your first baby.
However, if you did, that's great!
Having said that, we also recognize that labor is exhausting and we want you to get rest.
Rooming in can help establish good sleep patterns between mom and baby as well.
So, that's the deal with rooming in.
It is certainly your choice to have the baby in your room through your entire hospital stay, but please realize that the staff is there for you and your baby regardless.
We want you to express your wishes and enjoy your hospital stay, but mostly enjoy your time with your new baby.
Can you explain to me the benefits of keeping your newborn with you 24 hours,7 days per week?
It seems exhausting to me!In fact, keeping the baby with you ‘24/7’ has been shown to help the baby establish a better sleep cycle, which in the long run will provide better long-term sleep patterns.
Having said that, you need to recover from your delivery— and if that means getting help from the nursing staff, by all means, we are family friendly and will provide all the support you need.
I keep hearing this buzz word ‘baby friendly’ at my childbirth education classes, but I have no idea what it means.
Shouldn't all hospitals be baby friendly?Yes, all hospitals should be baby friendly!
In fact, ‘Baby-Friendly USA’ is the national authority for the Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative in the United States.
The Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative is a global program sponsored by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) to encourage and recognize hospitals and birthing centers that offer an optimal level of care for infant feeding.
There are several features of this initiative that have proven to help moms achieve and maintain breastfeeding for the baby’s first six to 12 months.
I am planning on breastfeeding, and have been reading a lot about it.
I see that six months exclusive breastfeeding or longer is recommended.
I told my mom this (who did not breastfeed) and she said that is way too long to go without giving my baby actual food.
What do you recommend?The American Academy of Pediatrics and the CDC (Centers for Disease Control) certainly advocate at least six months of breastfeeding!
Many women are able to exclusively breastfeed for up to a year or more.
The nutritional needs of a newborn infant are complete from breast milk alone.
In fact, the solids that are given in addition to breast milk are given in an effort to develop certain tastes and textures, but offer minimal nutritional value.
Your baby will be getting those solids in addition to breast milk, so go for it!
I'm certain that your mom will be supportive, and it will be amazing to both of you how your baby develops simply by the nutrition that you provide.
Due to lots of pressure from some family members, I did not breastfeed my first child.
However, I really would like to try with my second baby due next month!
There are breastfeeding support groups and lactation consultants that can meet with you now.
We encourage you to provide skin-to-skin contact right after delivery of the baby, and keep the baby with you in the postpartum room.
The staff will help you establish that bond and those first few days can be the best first step in providing a great breastfeeding routine.
I encourage my patients to talk to as many people as possible to get support in their efforts.
Many realize in doing so, that there is no right or wrong way to breastfeed.
You really can do it.
You just have to believe, and get the support you need from those around you.
Don't forget, it's best for the baby.
Is there a possibility that I won't be able to produce any breast milk?
I want to breastfeed so badly, but I am scared I won't have any to feed my baby.
You need to trust yourself and your body.
Don't worry about things too early.
Most women are able to produce breast milk, and breastfeed successfully.
Going forward, I was wondering if there is anything we can do to slow the progression.
She has dysautonomia as well, so most medicines do not work or cause very bad side effects.
I should say that she is currently pretty well controlled.
