Progressive myoclonic epilepsy is not one disease.
This name is applied to a number of different genetic diseases and each one has a different clinical course and outlook.
We suggest that you find out the exact disease (diagnosis) with your doctor.
This will help in treatment decisions, future plan of care and possible outlooks in the long term.
Since these conditions are rare, it may be prudent to see a pediatric epilepsy specialist in conjunction with genetics and neurology specialists to decide the best plan of care for your daughter.
My granddaughter has these episodes, with freezing and staring spells.
Her cheeks get red, but her nose and forehead (the T-zone) goes pale.
She then starts making a 'clicking' sound like she is gulping or trying to gulp her saliva.
She is nonresponsive at these times.
They lasted for about a minute and when she’s done she goes right to sleep.
She had these frequently for about three days and then stopped.
Her parents are taking her to the doctor, but do these spells sound like some kind of seizure?
My niece has been diagnosed with absence seizures.
What exactly are these and what can we expect with them?
Absence seizures are episodes of partial or complete loss of responsiveness to surroundings.
These seizures are usually short (lasting 10 to 30 seconds) and occur multiple times in a day.
Typically, absence epilepsy is considered a treatable condition.
Up to 50 to 60 percent of patients might outgrow it without a need for lifelong medications.
Our youngest daughter is 19 years old, and was diagnosed with generalized epilepsy with tonic clonic seizures at 18 years old.
We have found this a strange age to develop it because it may be treated by either pediatric or adult epileptologists.
To make matters more complicated, our 22-year-old daughter also just developed epilepsy, but she has been diagnosed as having complex partial seizures.
What is the age cut-off for treatment by a pediatric specialist?
Do you consider it unusual for both daughters to have developed this at these ages and within the same year?
It is likely that there is an underlying genetic predisposition for developing epilepsy in the family.
However, this conclusion needs a careful evaluation and confirmation about the specific type of epilepsy by an epilepsy specialist as well as consultation with a genetic specialist.
Typically, pediatric epilepsy doctors would accept new patients until 18 years of age.
This may not be a strict rule depending up on a specific practice.
My four-year-old daughter has been undergoing epilepsy treatment for the past nine months.
She was taking valproic acid until December, and then started taking Keppra XR® .
We have found out that she is mostly in an excited state, and is not sitting and writing well.
Her eye and hand coordination is not in sync.
When we had a preschool assessment they suggested that we should have our daughter checked by a psychologist.
Is something related to epilepsy causing all these issues?
The symptoms you describe are unlikely to be due to epilepsy.
We agree that an evaluation by a child psychiatrist is the most appropriate next step.
Drug side effects should be considered in the differential as well.
My son is diagnosed with Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS).
He started having seizures at the age of 4 ½ years old, and he turns 6 years old in April.
His seizures are absence, with blinking and his head dropping back.
He has been on medication for a year.
For the past three months he has been taking Keppra XR®  (levetiracetam), valproic acid and frisium.
During this time he hasn’t experienced a seizure, but he hasn’t shown any improvement in his language or hearing skills.
He had an EEG (electroencephalogram) last week and it showed some improvement.
An MRI he had about eight months ago didn’t show any brain damage or lesion.
Should we consider surgery and what are the expectations?
Will he speak again?
The language recovery in LKS can lag behind the improvement seen on EEG.
Typically, seizures are not very frequent or even may even remain controlled while the language difficulties are most obvious.
My daughter has severe speech apraxia, but does not have developmental delays.
Could surgery help her speech?
Epilepsy surgery is reserved for treating medically refractory focal epilepsy.
My 5-year-old son has generalized convulsive epilepsy.
He also has anger issues.
Is it possible that the anger issues could be related to the epilepsy?
Behavior issues are quite common in children with epilepsy.
Children with epilepsy may require behavior intervention as well as consideration for medications for these issues.
Why is memory such an issue for epilepsy patients, and what are some suggestions in handling it?
Memory issues are common in patients with epilepsy.
Memory issues are usually multi-factorial (due to many factors).
These factors could be the primary disease that causes epilepsy, burden of seizures, number and doses of epilepsy medications, as well as other medications that the patient might be taking for mood, behavior, sleep, etc.
Does puberty have any effect on epilepsy/seizures?
The effect of puberty on a child’s seizures cannot be predetermined.
It is possible that a few children may have some increase in frequency or severity of their seizures temporarily during puberty.
Close observation as well as medical management adjusting epilepsy drugs according to weight gain would be helpful.
In female patients, keeping a log of seizure occurrences during a particular phase of the menstrual cycle might also be helpful for the physician adjusting medications.
My son started having seizures in 2005 at the age of 14 years old.
He has had a total of 14 seizures to date with the last one occurring in June 2012.
He takes 1500 mg Keppra®  (levetiracetam) twice daily,1050 mg Trileptal®  (Oxcarbazepine) twice daily, and Dilantin®  (phenytoin) 200 mg one time daily and 25 mg one time daily.
There seems to be no pattern to his seizures, and they are unpredictable.
Is this too much medicine?
Since he started having seizures around puberty, will they stop when he is in his 20s?
His life is full and normal.
He is an excellent student and tennis player except he has had no freedom from seizures yet.
Is surgery an option?
Should he be on different medications?
Is there some path we are not thinking of?
If your son is not experiencing any adverse effects on this combination of medications, he is not necessarily on too much medication.
Having said that, we usually try to use one or two medications in combination for treatment.
You may want to discuss with his epilepsy team to see if his medications may be reduced from three to two medications.
Do you ever consider symptoms due to medication side effects as a reason to change treatment?
Yes, it is important to choose a medication with minimum to no side effects if possible.
My daughter was diagnosed with infantile spasms in October 2010 when she was five months old.
Her spasms stopped with Sabril®  (vigabatrin), but seizures began this fall in 2012.
She was put on Trileptal®  (Oxcarbazepine) and was seizure-free for five weeks.
Her medications were increased and she was only seizure-free for one week.
Her physician added Topamax®  (topiramate) and she was seizure-free for four weeks.
The dose was increased, and she was only seizure-free for 10 days.
Since her seizures returned, she was started on Onfi®  (clobazam) and weaned from Topamax® .
She is now up to full strength on Onfi® , and this is the second week.
We are hopeful that this medication will work for her, but are cautious because the others have failed.
You are describing a typical course of a ‘honeymoon period’ with new medications.
However, if seizures recur while on Onfi® , it may be reasonable to pursue an epilepsy evaluation to look for underlying cause, which may influence choice of treatment.
At first our mindset what to exhaust all medication avenues before surgery, but surgery seems to have a high success rate.
What is that rate?
What are the key variables to a successful surgery?
Epilepsy surgery is a very attractive option for certain patients with epilepsy.
The most important variable that improves the likelihood of surgical success in the control of seizures is the presence of a lesion on the brain MRI that overlaps with the seizure recording on video EEG (electroencephalogram).
If the lesion can be completely removed without producing any new neurological deficits, surgery is likely to be successful in controlling seizures.
Is surgical intervention an option for generalized epilepsy?
If the generalized epilepsy is due to an underlying focal brain problem, surgery may be offered.
My four-year-old has parietal cortical dysphasia with a venous angioma in the same area.
Is surgery a consideration when the side effects are affecting his future?
He was two years old when his seizures started.
After the medications were started, he came home a different child.
He was hyperactive, had poor eye contact and was moody.
Now we are on another medication, Trileptal®  (Oxcarbazepine), since Keppra XR®  (levetiracetam) became ineffective.
After two years of being seizure free my son was starting to wean off medications when his seizures returned with a fury.
Yes, surgery may be a good option if medications are controlling the seizures at the cost of a very poor quality of life.
It is important to make sure that medication dose is not too much.
If it is, a simple dose adjustment can minimize side effects.
In order for surgery to be offered, it needs to be established that the dysplasia (abnormal growth) causing seizures can be safely and completely removed.
This is determined by a presurgical evaluation and the help of an experienced Pediatric Epilepsy Center.
Describe the recovery process of epilepsy surgery.
What limitations or precautions must be taken?
The recovery is different for each child.
It also depends on the type of epilepsy surgery.
Typically, your child may need to be in the hospital for seven to 10 days after surgery.
If there are no complications, they are discharged home or to a rehabilitation facility.
Recovery may take longer if they have any complications (such as bleeding, infection, stroke, etc).
If my child is considered a favorable candidate for surgery, how long does it take to get scheduled for surgery?
Usually within a week or two.
For emergency cases, of course the surgery is scheduled as soon as possible.
My 2-year-old son has been diagnosed with generalized myoclonic seizures.
He is now on Keppra XR®  (levetiracetam).
I have read about taking vitamin B6 with Keppra® .
Is this worth trying?
If so, what form is best and how much?
Could the epilepsy or Keppra®  cause developmental delays?
He has been on track so far.
How worried should I be about the side effects of the Keppra® ?
The best antiepileptic drug for your son depends on the accurate diagnosis of epilepsy syndrome or its cause.
Keppra®  can cause behavioral and mood side effects.
There have been anecdotal (unconfirmed) reports that vitamin B6 supplementation helps these side effects.
The decision about whether your son should continue Keppra®  should be based on efficacy or effectiveness as well as the degree of side effects.
We do not have evidence to recommend vitamin B6 therapy.
Children with epilepsy are at risk of developmental delay depending on the cause of epilepsy.
Medications, especially in high doses and combined with other medications, may produce some slow learning and processing.
What information can you share about sodium and seizures?
My 17-year-old son has had absence seizures since he was young.
After medicines were not helping he was tested to see if he was a candidate for epilepsy surgery.
He had that in June 2010.
Two years almost to the day later he had a grand mal seizure, and then another seizure one month after that, and another two months after that one.
On New Year’s Eve he had another seizure.
It almost seems that something builds up in his system and tries to get out.
I have read articles on sodium— and how too much and too little can play a big part in your system.
Another interesting fact is that his acne gets really bad and sometimes he even gets a sore.
As I said I believe some toxins or a build up of sodium accumulates until he explodes.
Please give me your thoughts on this.
The sodium intake from a regular diet is very unlikely to result in a sodium imbalance and cause seizures.
Only extreme diets, certain medications or inappropriate rehydration with electrolyte solutions can cause significant sodium imbalance.
This can be measured with a blood test.
Such sodium imbalance can result in severe seizures.
We feel that seizures from a sodium imbalance can be easily distinguished from epileptic seizures by your doctor and his team with the help of specific tests.
Our 8-year-old son was diagnosed with refractory epilepsy 1 1/2 years ago.
(He was completely healthy with no underlying medical conditions prior to onset.)
His seizures are multifocal, so he is not a candidate for surgery.
He usually has at least one seizure a day, sometimes multiple.
He is on three different antiepilepsy drugs, and suffers from side effects of these.
His quality of life is poor at this point.
We heard about TMS.
What is your experience with TMS (transcranial magnetic stimulation) in pediatric patients in terms of seizure control with refractory epilepsy?
We would like to wean him off some of his medications since the side effects are almost as bad as the seizures he continues to have despite them.
We do not have experience with TMS for the treatment of seizures.
My son is five years old and was diagnosed with epilepsy at nine months old.
He has many types of seizures.
He gets full body drops, head drops, eyes shifting to left with head turning to left shoulder, body jerks, eyes rolling, left eyeball shaking, looking up, left eyeball twitching and eyes not together.
He is developmentally delayed.
My poor, little boy suffers from seizures everyday.
We tried over 10 medications and diet changes, but they did not work—making things worse.
Will he be seen right away?
Should I bring him to the emergency room?
We will be happy to take care of your son.
Your son appears to have difficult-to treat-epilepsy and is likely to require a comprehensive evaluation.
Please be sure to bring all the previous reports and CDs of MRIs, if available.
This was a great chat.
I hope this was helpful.
All you need is access to a computer.
If you have always had normal PAP tests and tested negative for HPV (human papillomavirus), then you may go every three to five years before your next PAP test.
Can you please explain FSH and LH numbers as they relate to peri-menopause, menopause and post-menopause?
Do the numbers determine where a patient is in terms of menopause?The hormone levels of FSH and LH may sometimes be checked during the different stages of menopause.
Unfortunately, it is not used as a diagnostic tool because these levels are not constant, and may fluctuate depending on when they are checked.
How is menopause diagnosed?
Just by symptoms or by blood work?It is diagnosed by symptoms and going one year without a menstrual period.
If a woman has had a hysterectomy, this can be more difficult to diagnose.
Therefore, we go by symptoms and may order blood work to check for hormone levels.
Hormone levels alone are not diagnostic for menopause.
What are some things I can do to improve the quality of my sleep?
I have stopped all caffeine intake after about 3:00 p.m., and I try to keep the same bedtime hours even on weekends.
The main problem is waking up very hot (with my covers on), and then I get very cold (with my covers off).
This pattern repeats all night long.
Getting quality sleep is very important for you to feel energized and for your general well being.
What are the most common signs and symptoms of menopause?The most common symptoms of menopause are hot flashes and night sweats.
Women experience these very differently.
Some women may feel mild symptoms like a flushing in the face, while others may feel severe symptoms of embarrassing sweats and a deep, ‘inferno’-intense type of heat.
How do I know when I'm fully done with menopause?We can say that you have gone through menopause when it has been one full year without a menstrual period.
The average age of menopause is 51 years old, but women may experience this much earlier or later.
I can't seem to lose any weight now that I'm in menopause.
Do you have any suggestions?After menopause, it is known that metabolism slows down greatly.
We tend to store more fat around the abdominal area.
What's the best way to deal with the emotional roller coaster I have been going through?
If my husband doesn't divorce or kill me, I would be surprised!Menopause is a huge change in life that can bring on many different emotional changes, and should not be underestimated.
Hot flashes and night sweats can severely interfere with your quality of sleep, making you feel fatigued, more irritable and even affect your memory.
What are the symptoms of perimenopause?
How do you then know that you've entered menopause?Some women experience the most bothersome symptoms of perimenopause, even before menopause occurs.
I am experiencing hair loss.
Is this common when going through menopause?Hormonal fluctuations during menopause may trigger more hair loss.
What is the best treatment for low libido after a total hysterectomy?There can be many reasons women may feel low libido.
It may be due to avoidance as a result of pain, if you are experiencing vaginal dryness or spasming during intercourse.
There could be factors in the relationship and stress which interfere with a woman's desire.
Should there be any vaginal bleeding during or after menopause?No.
Any bleeding after menopause is considered abnormal and requires immediate evaluation, to rule out any uterine cancer or other structural abnormality.
With all of these bothersome symptoms, I hope there is a light at the end of the tunnel.
What are the positives that I can hope for during and after menopause?Women should embrace this new chapter in their life.
It's often a ‘second honeymoon,’ with no worries about contraception.
Often women are ‘empty nesters,’ leaving them the freedom to focus on their health and relationship with their partner.
Today's postmenopausal woman is a more youthful and vibrant woman, allowing herself to finally be a priority again.
Why do you continue to have occasional hot flashes years after menopause?This occurs because the ovaries are no longer producing estrogen.
Sometimes extra adipose (fat tissue) may produce a small amount of estrogen, which may help alleviate some of the symptoms.
I'm 46 years old, and had a total hysterectomy three years ago.
I do not take any hormones.
I have been having hot flashes and some panic attacks.
I'm afraid to take hormones because of a history of breast cancer in the family.
My mother, aunt and great grandmother all had breast cancer.
Is there a safe way for me to take hormones?It sounds like you are having very bothersome hot flashes, which are really interfering with the quality of your life.
Although I understand your fears of a strong family history of breast cancer, it may not be hereditary.
I have been taking Premarin®  0.625 for over two years after my hysterectomy for uterine cancer (stage 1).
How do I determine when to stop taking the medication?
For the past two weeks I have been out of the medication.
I’m waiting for a mail-order pharmacy to deliver it, but I have not experienced any horrendous hot flashes.
Is there a possibility I could discontinue the Premarin® ?
How long is safe to stay on hormone therapy?There is no time frame for how long someone should be on hormone therapy.
It is really dependent on monitoring your symptoms and other medical conditions.
Hot flashes—do they ever stop?
I hate being on Prempro®  and risking cancer.
Unfortunately, every woman experiences menopausal symptoms differently.
Some women do not experience any hot flashes, while others suffer tremendously.
The same is true for how long they may last.
I had a total hysterectomy at the age of 40 years.
My hot flashes were controlled with Premarin® , but I stopped taking it after the publicity over breast cancer.
I am now 62 years old, and still get significant hot flashes primarily at night, which interrupts my sleep.
What can you suggest for treatment?If the night sweats are really interfering with the quality of your sleep, you may benefit from restarting a low-dose estrogen-only therapy, depending on your risk factors.
What are the different types of hormone therapy?Hormone therapy comes in many different formulations.
There are synthetic hormone therapies as well as bio-identical hormone therapies, which are chemically identical to the body's own hormone.
What are the common side effects of being on hormone therapy?People usually tolerate hormone therapy very well.
The greatest risk of being on any hormone therapy (including birth control) is the rare risk of developing a blood clot.
It is very important that you monitor for any symptoms of pain or swelling in your leg, and notify your physician right away if it occurs.
People who are on natural progesterone may feel a little sleepy.
Therefore, we recommend taking it at night.
Some women may experience some breast tenderness when starting hormone therapy, but this is usually minimal.
I am 45 years old, and had a total hysterectomy one and a half years ago.
I am on estradiol patch.
In your opinion, is there a preference between the patch and oral hormones?
I have issue with the patch coming off during the week.
There are different formulations of the patches that are available, such as the Vivelle-dot® (which may have a stronger adhesive).
There are also formulations of gels/creams and sprays.
Both oral hormone therapy and transdermal hormone therapy each have a different advantage, depending on your medical history and types of symptoms that you are having.
There may be a lower risk of developing DVT (blood clot) on transdermal therapy.
I am 51 years old, and I had a hysterectomy around 25 years ago.
I have had hot flashes for the last year or so.
I had both ovaries removed one week ago for a large benign cyst.
I have had no hot flashes since the surgery, but I have had some nausea since the surgery.
Can this nausea be due to the loss of hormones?Everyone experiences perimenopausal symptoms differently, but nausea is not a typical symptom of perimenopause or due to fluctuation of hormones.
If the symptoms persist, I would recommend further evaluation by your provider.
I am fibrocystic (active family history) and have been told I cannot go on hormone replacement therapy or use any 'natural' products.
What can I do for hot flashes?You may still be a candidate for different formulations of hormone therapy, depending on your complete medical and family history.
You may benefit from further evaluation by a women's health specialist, so that you can be given all of your options in order to make an informed decision for yourself.
Please see my previous responses about non-hormonal ways to treat hot flashes.
What is your opinion of compounded hormone therapy and can you explain it?It is very important to distinguish between compounded hormone therapy and FDA approved hormone therapy.
Would eating too much sugar cause hot flashes/night sweats?Sugar can be a trigger of hot flashes in some women.
I would avoid sugar and see how your symptoms respond.
What foods or vegetables can you eat to curb the hot flashes?There may be a slight improvement of hot flashes by increasing natural soy products in your diet.
Not all women have the enzyme to convert the soy into estrogen.
We do not recommend soy supplementation.
If so, how does one find out definitively whether cardiovascular disease or arthritis is causing the high reading?
My hs-CRP is 10.39.
My LDL (low-density lipoprotein) is 114, and my HDL (high-density lipoprotein) is 68.
My triglycerides are 118 and my cholesterol is 200.
The hs CRP reading does show inflammation that is system wide.
Certain forms of arthritis, like rheumatoid and lupus, that are inflammatory can elevate the test significantly.
Osteoarthritis generally does not lead to an increase in inflammatory markers.
Why do I have so much pain after sitting in the car or driving?
I can hardly walk when I get out.
What you are describing is called the gel phenomenon.
It is the sensation of the ligaments and tendons that are surrounding the joints getting stiff from inactivity.
Blood needs to move back around in those tissues.
Also, knees that have loss of cartilage from osteoarthritis can be stiff after prolonged sitting.
This is likely due to the joint fluid being less lubricating than it is in a healthy joint.
Gel phenomenon lasts typically less than 15 minutes in wear-and-tear forms of arthritis.
If the stiffness or gel phenomenon is longer than that, you may need to see a rheumatologist to be sure there is no inflammatory component to your arthritis.
I suspect I am developing CMC (carpometacarpal) joint arthritis.
The base of both thumbs and index finger are extremely tender to painful, depending on my activity.
Repetitive motions with needlepoint and using the computer aggravate it.
Pain is experienced with opening jars, doors, etc.
I am also allergic to NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs).
Should I initially try splints that I can purchase at a drugstore?
Rest is difficult with my job.
The thumb and fingers can often be aggravated by our activity, either work or hobby related.
Remember it is important to ‘use it of lose it’" though, and you should continue to do these activities.
Heat, in the form of warm water or a paraffin bath, can be a great way to warm up the hands.
Ice can be beneficial with the sharp pain.
Using splints that protect the thumb, a thumb spica splint, can be very helpful as well.
Over-the-counter medications like acetaminophen or rubs can help.
Occupational therapy and injections or surgery might be options down the road.
I have rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and gout in my finger joints and wrists, with a lot of soreness and swelling in the joints as well as stiffness.
Do you have any suggestions that would help this?
I am under the care of a physician at an arthritis center in Columbus.
In order to minimize stiffness and pain and swelling it is important to treat your underlying conditions of RA and gout aggressively.
There are many medications available and, if you do not feel adequate relief, you may to need adjust your disease-modifying medications as best you can with your physician.
Ask for medications to help with pain as well.
What do you recommend for pain relief for arthritis in the back?Pain due to arthritis in the back can be treated by many different modalities.
It is important to engage in a comprehensive pain management program that includes conservative management with medications and physical therapy, as well as more advanced treatment options such as injections into the joints of the back.
I have arthritis in the shoulder, hip and knee.
What do you recommend for pain relief?
Does one pain relief medication work the same on arthritis, no matter what the location, or do you recommend different types of pain relievers depending on where the arthritis is?Anti-inflammatory medications are beneficial for the treatment of pain due to osteoarthritis.
Usually, if a medication works for arthritic pain in a particular joint, it should work for arthritic pain in another joint, unless there is another source of pain in a given joint.
For the  treatment of arthritis pain, what does a pain management consultation consist of?
What are some of the treatments recommended?During your initial consultation, a thorough history will be taken with regard to your pain complaint.
You will be examined by the physician to evaluate the areas where you have pain.
Depending on what is found on the physical examination, and how it relates to your symptoms, a treatment plan will be designed specifically for you.
Treatments can range from medications alone to medications along other modalities including a TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) unit, over-the-counter preparations, physical therapy and injection therapy.
With diabetes mellitus without complications and polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR), where do I start for pain control?Pain control with any form of underlying arthritis requires that you treat the underlying form of arthritis.
In your case, steroids, which are typically the treatment of choice for PMR, are not great to use in patients with diabetes.
But there are other options you can discuss with your physician.
You might want to ask about Tylenol®  for pain control while waiting for other medications to work.
Is there an over-the-counter gel that is as good as Voltaren® ?Over-the-counter rubs tend to be either liniments, like Icy Hot®  or Biofreeze® , that have menthol or wintergreen to increase blood flow to the area where they are applied.
There are also capsaicin rubs that are derived from hot pepper and block substance P at the nerve endings.
Other over-the-counter rubs include Aspercreme®  which has some anti- inflammatory properties.
There are no NSAID (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug) over-the-counter rubs at this time.
I am female, and I’m not eligible for a replacement surgery.
I use a cane.
Can I lose the cane if I wear a brace?If you are referring to your knee or ankle, a brace can be fitted to help with support, which may allow you to walk without a cane.
However, if you utilize the cane for stability and balance, you may need to continue to use it even when wearing a brace.
My mother who is 62 years old suffers from diabetes and arthritis.
What are the exercises that she could do to control both?In general, diet and exercise are beneficial for helping to create better control of diabetes.
Aquatic therapy tends to be gentler on the body for people with arthritis or other painful conditions.
How can my mother manage her arthritis pain better— with or without medication?Water therapy is a good non-pharmacological treatment option to help with arthritic pain.
Depending on the type of arthritis, over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medications are also good options.
I suffer with osteoarthritis, and nothing I takes works.  It makes me go into an anxiety attack even when I put those ointments on my knees.
It goes through my body, and makes me short of breath.
Is there anything that I can take without side effects?
I am borderline diabetic, have high blood pressure and take thyroid pills.
With the kind of work that I do I am on my feet all day, and that can get really painful.
You are certainly in a position that many patients find themselves with other conditions that make treating pain difficult.
No medications are free of side effects.
Physical therapy and TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) units can be helpful as well.
Success rates can vary depending on the severity of the disease and other medical problems that the patient has.
Does taking calcium prevent the need for joint replacement?
How much calcium should post-menopausal women take?Calcium is of course very important for bone health along with Vitamin D. In general, women should be getting 1200 mg to 1600 mg of calcium per day between their diet and supplements.
Supplements should be either in the form of calcium carbonate or calcium citrate,.
These supplements should be taken in divided doses throughout the day, as we can only absorb about 400 mg at a time.
Take calcium with orange juice or meals to help with absorption.
Avoid taking with caffeine, alcohol or when smoking since this interferes with absorption.
Dietary forms are best, like milk, yogurt and cheese.
Broccoli and kale can be good sources as well.
What natural supplements help with the pain?Natural supplements are not FDA-regulated, and the quality of each batch cannot be guaranteed.
Does fish oil taken by mouth lubricate the joints?Omega 3 fish oil with DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) and EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) is thought to be a mild anti-inflammatory and antioxidant at a dose of 1000 mg twice daily.
Thereby, it is an option for treating arthritis pain and stiffness.
As always, check with your physician to be sure there is not interaction with other medical conditions or treatments.
We know that saturated fats like the ones found in red meat or other oils used for cooking can be pro-inflammatory.
An anti-inflammatory diet includes lots of fruits and vegetables, fish and other lean meats, and omega 3 oils, as well as low dairy.
In addition, omega 3 fish oil with DHA and EPA is thought to be a mild anti- inflammatory and antioxidant at a dose of 1000 mg twice daily.
In addition making sure that there are no chronic infections, such as proper care of your teeth and gingiva will help lower inflammation.
There is some thought that yogurt with live cultures or the use of probiotics helps the digestive track, too, to lower inflammation.
Do you mean rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis?
I ask because the treatment is different.
Is all arthritis pain in the joint or can it be in the bone?
It could cause adjacent bone pain.
It is really dependent on the type of arthritis you are referring to.
Thepage linked hereexplains many of the different types of arthritis.
What are the major diagnostic indicators you use when determining the specific type of inflammatory arthritis a person has?
How important is that information to treatment?
For example, does it help to know whether you are dealing with psoriatic arthritis rather than a generic inflammatory arthritis?
Arthritis has different kinds of forms.
There are blood markers available to help us differentiate between them.
The markers could be used to differentiate between psoriatic arthritis and other inflammatory arthritis, such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus-related arthritis.
I know I have osteoarthritis beginning in my thumb joints and will eventually need surgery.
But is it possible to also end up with rheumatoid arthritis?
And is rheumatoid arthritis ever just confined to one area, or does it affect the entire body?
Osteoarthritis or degenerative changes do not evolve into rheumatoid arthritis.
However, advanced rheumatoid arthritis can cause degenerative changes or osteoarthritis.
Rheumatoid arthritis usually affects small joints in a symmetrical way.
Certainly any joints could be affected, including large joints such as the knee.
I know that I have osteoarthritis, but at the age of 76 years old, I am unable to tell whether my pains are attributable to that or something else.
I have pains at night that wake me.
They are not joint pains nor muscle cramps as far as I can tell.
They occur in the thigh and calf and respond well to massage, but I do not know what causes them.
Are these symptoms common with arthritis?
If not, what should I consider?
Your pain in the thighs and calves could represent soft-tissue rheumatism other than a joint condition.
Aquatic therapy and massage might be helpful.
My joints have been swelling at night.
I have Hashimoto thyroid disease.
What sort of tests would I need to have done to diagnose whether it is rheumatoid arthritis or perhaps systemic lupus erythematosus?
Inflammatory arthritis can be associated with Hashimoto thyroid disease.
There are blood tests which can be used to differentiate between systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis.
I would recommend you to see a rheumatologist to find out.
Is there any way to head off things like rheumatoid arthritis and lupus?
It is possibly too late as I am starting to get swelling of my joints as I sleep?
Sometime arthritis can be seen in people with Hashimoto thyroiditis.
