What would be the first signs or indicators that a women would notice that would indicate that they are going into menopause or perimenopause?
Change in menstrual cycle and/or hot flashes/night sweats.
Is nausea a symptom of menopause?
Can you get pregnant while in perimenopause?
Until you have had 12 months of no menses over age 50, with signs and symptoms of menopause, there is still a chance of ovulation/pregnancy.
HPV test (human papillomavirus) – is it only needed at age 20 if sexually active?
A woman needs a pap smear by age 21 or within 3 years of sexual debut/sexual activity.
We do not test for HPV in the 20s UNLESS abnormal pap.
Once a woman is 30 years of age both the pap smear and the HPV dna test should be done-IF both are normal then paps smears with HPV are done every 3 years.
Women who smoke, who have HIV who have had abnormal paps or women exposed to DES in utero need more frequent paps.
Pre-menopause, will this cause an increase in migraines?
Perimenopause with fluctuating hormone levels can worsen migraine.
After menopause, migraine usually gets better in most women.
I have a chapter in my book devoted to discussing migraines and how to prevent them.
My sister had a hysterectomy about a year ago, without removing her ovaries.
She was told that her ovaries died 6-8 eight weeks later.
What does this mean?
It is generally a good idea to leave the ovaries in after hysterectomy-at least up to age 65-unless there is a family history of breast/ovarian cancer and/or abnormal ovaries, as even with hysterectomy, there is a survival advantage to keeping the ovaries.
That said, usually within 2 years of hysterectomy, the ovaries don't function to the same degree.
They do not 'die,' just may not be making eggs/estrogen as robustly as before.
I’m 54, have never had children, and am having very heavy, disruptive periods.
My doctor told me that via ultrasound I have a large uterine fibroid.
What is the latest on UAE/UFE versus hysterectomy?
Will an abdominal hysterectomy compromise my abdominal muscles long-term?
We have many non-hysterectomy alternatives, including UFE.
However, if the fibroid is too large, then you might not be a candidate for UFE.
Vaginal and laparoscopic hysterectomy is an option for women who don't want abdominal muscles cut as well as single port and robotic hysterectomy.
Some have said soy should not be consumed by small children because of the Estrogen in it; what are your thoughts?
Soy foods are fine for all people of all ages and genders but not soy pills or powders.
What about an injection to put you right into menopause?
Lupron injections can temporarily shut down ovaries and put you into medical menopause-we do this sometimes for endometriosis and severe PMS.
Can you break up 30 minutes of exercise into 2 15 minutes periods with the same benefit?
Do NOT panic If you are a woman on hormone therapy (HT), you should continue treatment and return to your physician for regular follow-up care and undergo a HT evaluation every year.
Most women find the benefits of hormones outweigh the risks.
What is CC's view on HRT now with the recent press release about its relationship to breast cancer?
If I am currently taking synthetic HRT, should I switch to bio-identical hormones or should I stop therapy altogether?
My doctor insists that the total body benefits outweigh the risks.
What other nutritional supplements are available that can do all that HRT is supposed to be doing for me?
All hormones are 'synthesized' in lab even ‘bio-identical’ ones.
It sounds like you have a good physician who is advocating for you!
There is no need for pap smear of cervix if no cervix and if no cancer.
Why are you trying to go off estrogen?
If your ovaries were removed then your body will never make any estrogen or ovarian hormones.
Many women with complete hysterectomy need some dose of estrogen lifelong.
The benefits of estrogen outweigh the risks for MOST women particularly women under age 65 and women who have had hysterectomy.
After going through surgical menopause and being on estrogen for 30 yrs (56), shouldn't I be past menopause?
After going off estrogen I still get the symptoms, will this be the case all my life?Speaker_-_Dr__Holly_L__Thacker: You never get 'past menopause,' in that your body will never make estrogen again.
Many women with surgical menopause need to take some estrogen lifelong.
Are all menopause medications like this?
No such thing as 'withdrawal' off menopausal hormones.
50% of women who stop menopausal hormone therapy will have recurrence of their symptoms and 50% won't.
If one has recurrence of symptoms, then likely they need to go back on therapy.
When taking medications for hot flashes, nights sweats, etc., how can you avoid the weight gain side effect?
Hormones in menopausal formulation do NOT cause weight gain.
With age, metabolism slows and most women gain weight, unless they step up exercise AND reduce caloric consumption.
Have you written prescriptions for patients to get the Intrinsa patch from Canadian pharmacies since it is not available in the USA?
I have patients from Canada and Europe on Intrinsa.
I do not have a license to practice in Canada or Europe so I usually have my American patients on compounded topical testosterone or oral combination estrogen/testosterone if they need it.
What is your opinion on taking bio-identical hormones?
Every woman is an individual.
If a woman needs MENOPAUSAL hormones, they can be prescribed safely by prescription, regulated hormones including so called 'bio identical' estrogen and progesterone.
There is not a reason to use compounded unregulated hormones for most women.
I was wondering if you could address bio-identical hormones and when you use these for your patients.
I prescribe menopausal hormone therapy, including so called 'bio identical hormones.'
Actually, that is a marketing term - not a scientific term - to women who have indication.
There are lots of different choices, routes, doses and ways to give estrogen and progesterone.
Most women (unless ovaries removed) do not need testosterone.
If they do need testosterone, then it has to be compounded or used in 1/7 to 1/10 the dose of available male products because our FDA did not approve the testosterone patch for women (though wisely it is available in Europe and Canada).
When going from oral HRT to bi-est progesterone cream, how do you determine dosage?
Progesterone cream does NOT protect the uterus.
Compounded progesterone is not protective for a woman on transdermal estrogen like bi-est.
We have seen an increase in uterine cancer in women on unregulated compounded hormones.
One A Day Menopause formula – any thoughts?
I would have to look at label.
I would not use if has soy isoflavones or other non-vitamins in it.
How long do I have to look forward to the hot flashes and fitful sleep?
You don't have to look forward to any uncomfortable symptoms, unless you want to.
There are several options.
There is NO way to predict what women will flash-some never do and some will flash their ENTIRE life if not treated.
I went through menopause at an early age (42.)
I'm having hot flashes, mood swings, depression, euphoria.
Is it possible for someone to go through this twice or is something else going on in my body?
No such thing as 'going through menopause,' you are in it or not - meaning once ovaries stop making eggs/estrogen they don't start making it again UNLESS you were misdiagnosed with early menopause -perhaps you were just anovulatory.
You should see a physician for evaluation and FSH and estradiol blood tests and examination.
I am a 59 yo w f who went through menopause 8 years ago.
I was on estrace since this time until one year ago at which time I stopped all hormone treatment.
For the past year I have noticed that my scalp is becoming more and more noticeable because my hair is thinning, especially in front.
I have been to a dermatologist and she indicates that it could be hormonal.
She says I have mild shedding and no patches of baldness but I want to stop this immediately.
Will starting back on estrace help?
Using estrogen to treat aging skin and thinning hair is not FDA approved; however there are clearly positive effects of estrogen on skin and hair.
If you have a uterus, you cannot just take estrogen/estrace, you will need progesterone as well.
My doctors have never discussed menopause with me.
I have many medical issues and a need to talk often and seek reassurance.
I very often feel like I'm bothering them.
Why should I stay on meds-my concerns are not unlike any other mother's and I still cry and feel low now and then?
Menopausal symptoms are hot flashes, night sweats, vaginal dryness and thinning, and bone loss.
If you are on anti-depressant medicines and menopausal-no periods, hot flashes, etc then hormone therapy may boost the antidepressants mood elevating effects.
Is it common for women to develop fibromyalgia during menopause?
However, fibromyalgia can get worse with menopause if you have menopausal symptoms preventing deep restorative sleep.
Can you talk about normal behavioral changes during menopause?
My mother is like a different person.
Behavior changes are not a part of menopause.
Your mother should see a physician for evaluation for other causes of behavior change.
I have been in menopause 3 years now.
You should see a headache specialist such as the doctors in our neurology/headache dept.
You mentioned crying and mood symptoms are related to neurotransmitters.
So then menopause is not the culprit of sudden tears?
Several factors - lifestyle, nutritional, exercise, sleep, stress reduction, etc. all have to be looked at.
Is there anything I can do to revive my low sex drive?
Decreased sex drive is normal throughout the seasons of our life.
If your sex drive seems to be waning, the first thing you need to do is examine the quality of your relationship with your sexual partner.
Conflicts (financial, in-laws, kids and stress) can and do affect sexual interest.
Also, following traditional sexual habits can become routine and boring.
I am currently on daily Divigel®  .1% and Prometrium®  200mg days 1-12 each month since July 2010.
I haven't had a libido for a very long time and thought once I started HT my libido would return.
Needless to say no libido and that does nothing for a marriage.
At this time, my husband and I haven't had sex since August and here we are in November already!
Is there anything I can do at this point other than waiting for the Intrinsa patch to be approved for use in the USA?
I tried compounded transdermal Testosterone some years ago, but it only made my voice deeper and my face hairier.
Sex drive is very complex.
It can be normal after menopause to not have a spontaneous sex drive.
The purpose of the sex drive is to reproduce and now you are in the post-reproductive phase of life.
There are many things you can do to improve your sex life.
What is vaginal atrophy?
Compounded estriol is very weak and expensive.
There should be NO breast tenderness on local estrogen.
You should look for other reasons for breast tenderness-too much fish oil, too much caffeine, too much progesterone.
Estrogen in menopausal doses RARELY causes breast tenderness and breast tenderness is not a sign of breast cancer.
My hair is beginning to thin.
What over-the-counter products might help prevent further thinning and/or loss.
I’m not interesting in taking Rogaine or any other prescription drugs.
I understand that the vitamin Biotin is helpful and shampoos and hair products containing Nioxin®  might be helpful too.
What do you think about these products and are there any other products that might be helpful?
The products you note are helpful, including HP Rogaine which has to be used 6 months prior to making a decision on benefit.
There are several cosmetic options like TOPPIK hair spray that can be helpful.
Can Premarin®  cause uterine cancer?
Even obese women not on hormones can be at increased risk for uterine cancer as adipose cells can convert androgens to estrogens and women with too much adipose tissue can have unopposed stimulation to lining of uterus, resulting in cancer.
Being slender, exercising, not having diabetes, having had children and/or having been on birth control pill and/or being on ADEQUATE progesterone with estrogen postmenopausally is all protective.
I recommend BMD (bone mineral density) testing within two years of menopause – earlier for patients with a family history of osteoporosis, low vitamin D levels or long-term steroid medication use.
Women who have unexplained bone fractures, skipped menses or who have taken treatments that lower hormone levels also should be tested.
Your physician will determine whether you need a BMD test based on your clinical history and risk factors.
A BMD is a quick and painless x-ray test that enables the physician to get a snapshot of bone health by measuring the mineral density in your bones.
Does the use of caffeine affect your bone density?
More than 2-3 cups of caffeine per day increases calcium loss in the urine which in turn can negatively affect calcium balance.
Can you over take meds for building bones? (i.e. Fosamax® ) Fosamax®  is a prescription medicine used to treat or prevent osteoporosis.
Any medicine can be over taken, over used or not indicated in certain circumstances.
You need to see a physician yearly to determine what type of bone regimen is best for you.
What is your recommended amount of daily Vitamin D?
Adults need at least 1,000 to 2,000 international units (IU) of vitamin D daily in order to absorb calcium.
Vitamin D deficiency is very common, particularly in northern latitudes such as Northeast Ohio.
Should vitamin deficiency testing (such as D) be done during an annual physical exam?
If there is any concern about deficiency, a 25 OH vitamin D level can be obtained.
Most adults will maintain a normal vitamin D level with a daily 2,000iu daily ingestion of separate(not connected to calcium or other multivitamins) vitamin D3 daily.
Can you hurt yourself if you take too much Vitamin D?
Doses up to 10,000 iu daily of vitamin D3 appear safe.
It is hard to get too much vitamin D unless you are on megadoses, or have sarcoidosis.
People often ask am I 'for or against hormones' which seems like a ridiculous proposition-almost like asking if you are 'for or against' a political party.  I am for women feeling healthy, being in the correct hormonal balance.
What is osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT)?
Osteopathic manipulative treatment is a form of treatment aimed at restoring function by balancing bones and soft tissue structures into their normal alignment.
Can you explain the basic principle behind osteopathic manipulation?
Basically, manipulation attempts to balance structures that are out of balance.
Who would benefit the most from osteopathic manipulation?
OMT is typically used to realign vertebrae or other joints to reduce “mechanical pain,” so people with back pain benefit significantly from this therapy.
Can anybody have OMT?
Or are there some cases when it is not recommended?
Manipulation should be avoided if the affected bone is broken or if a person has cancer, when the bones are very fragile.
Care should be taken in cases of severe osteoporosis.
Indirect, gentler methods may be used.
Can you please describe what some of the therapies entail?
There are at least 10 different subtypes of manipulative therapy that are described in osteopathic textbooks.
They all boil down to two general types: direct and indirect.
What should I expect to during an OMT visit?
On the first visit, your medical history is reviewed and a physical exam is performed to diagnose the problem.
Your doctor will thoroughly explain the manipulation technique before it is performed.
Does spinal manipulation hurt?
After OMT, especially after the first visit, there can be some soreness for a day or two.
Are there health risks involved with osteopathic manipulative therapy?
Rarely, a bone might crack with very aggressive techniques.
The worst risk is when high-velocity techniques are used on the cervical spine by someone unfamiliar with the technique.
Stroke is a very rare risk, occurring in 1 patient in 1 million cases.
Do you feel the effects of manipulation immediately or does it take time?
The resolution of pain can be immediate post-manipulation, but it may also take time.
For an acute problem that has recently occurred, the resolution may be quick, and pain relief seen after one treatment.
I have also seen patients who have had mechanical problems for years so that their bodies have learned to compensate.
Is pelvic physical therapy part of OMT?
I have patients do some exercises for pelvic dysfunction, but a physical therapist will provide additional exercises to strengthen this area.
Both pelvic physical therapy and OMT can be effective.
Is OMT an effective treatment option for me?
Indirect manipulative techniques can be used safely on osteoporotic patients.
Is osteopathic manipulation effective for post-operative spine care?
If so, is it more effective than physical therapy?
Physical therapy is important to strengthen muscles and improve range of motion, especially after surgery.
Manipulation would not be used much until the tissues have healed.
Is OMT an effective treatment for back pain from fibromyalgia?
In my experience, manipulation can relieve fibromyalgia pain for only a few days.
I have found that aerobic exercise, heat, and the right medication are a more effective treatment for fibromyalgia.
My husband was in a car accident a few months ago.
He still suffers lingering back pain and neck pain.
It was recommended that he see a chiropractor.
Which would be a better treatment for this type of injury, manipulation or chiropractic therapy?
I know many patients who have seen chiropractors following this type of situation and have improved.
I have also seen many patients in this situation where manipulation has helped.
Physical therapy should also be considered.
Can OMT be used to relieve lower left pelvic ache (near the hip/joints)?
I suspect the ache is musculoskeletal in nature.
I also experience sciatica on right side.
OMT can be used on the pelvic bones (innominates).
The spine can also get a little twisted near the sacrum, so manipulation can balance the pelvis and sacrum, thus helping pelvic and hip pain.
I have trigeminal neuralgia.
Someone mentioned that success was seen with osteopathic manipulation.
Have you seen any success?
The only techniques for trigeminal neuralgia would be cranial manipulation.
Though I have been exposed to it, I do not use it for that treatment, but there are osteopathic physicians who use it exclusively.
But, in your opinion, does it work?
How would I find a practitioner who is adept at this therapy?
I do not use a lot of cranial manipulation; therefore, I am not sure how successful it is.
There is a Cranial Academy, which you could search and contact via the Internet.
Those would be the individuals who practice cranial manipulation.
I have seen three different chiropractors over the last seven years.
It seems like I get relief for a while but I never get any better.
The same spots in my spine need adjustment every time.
Is there something different that you do that could help this, or are my back problems permanent?
Manipulation can do that as well.
It should be reassessed by a medical spine specialist.
You should speak to a cardiologist.
I sit at a computer all day (8 to 10 hours).
Can manipulation help take away or keep away the inevitable soreness and stiffness in my back, shoulders, and neck?
This is more of a physical therapy issue and would involve more stretching, if it is just a muscle tightness issue.
If a mechanical imbalance has occurred, that could be balanced with manipulation.
Is OMT used to treat nerve entrapment in the pelvic region?
There is a condition called neuralgia paresthetica that is caused by a nerve getting pinched by a ligament in the pelvis.
Manipulation can help to free this nerve.
I tell my patients on their first visit that we will meet four times.
If they are completely better or not better at all, we are finished with treatment.
If they are somewhat better, we will continue until we get the patient as improved as possible.
Can OMT cause damage for someone who has had a spinal fusion?
There are two types of manipulation: direct and indirect.
Direct techniques force the vertebrae to go where they do not want to go.
Indirect techniques actually put the vertebrae where they want to go and hold them there for a period of time, allowing them to reset themselves to a more balanced position.
I would use indirect, gentler techniques on the area where the spinal fusion surgery was performed.
I’ve read that general anesthesia is sometimes needed during manipulation procedures.
Is this generally the case?
When would this be used?
Direct, high-velocity techniques used to be done sometimes on patients under anesthesia so they would be perfectly relaxed, and tense muscles would not get in the way.
OMT under anesthesia is done less frequently today.
Do you use manipulation therapy in conjunction with other medical therapies?
Does one complement the other?
Is it possible that they would contradict each other?
Manipulation is another “tool in your belt” and can be used with other therapies.
When I do manipulation, I am looking for “somatic dysfunction,” which is the imbalance.
If I do not find somatic dysfunction, manipulation is not going to help.
How do you determine if there is somatic dysfunction?
Somatic dysfunction is determined by palpation and by range of motion testing.
What is the difference between an MD and a DO?
MDs and DOs take the same medical courses in medical school.
DOs also take courses in manipulative therapy.
Many DOs, once in practice, no longer use manipulation.
Manipulation is another useful tool that can be used for treating pain.
Would someone do osteopathic manipulation and chiropractic therapy at the same time, or do you choose one or the other?
Can they enhance each other?
In my experience, chiropractic manipulation for the most part is what is called HVLA technique - High Velocity Low Amplitude.
That is where you force the vertebrae to go where they do not want to go and they "pop” into place.
HVLA is one of the techniques performed by DOs as well.
My understanding is that the DO has more indirect and gentler techniques.
Since I am not a chiropractor, I cannot say that for sure.
Do chiropractors perform spinal manipulation?
Chiropractors perform direct manipulative techniques of spinal manipulation.
Osteopaths can perform those techniques and indirect, gentle techniques.
I have tried almost every prescription medication there is for fibromyalgia, arthritis, joint pain, and back pain.
Do you believe in herbal and vitamin remedies for pain, and what would you recommend?
Physical therapy should always be considered.
Aerobic exercise and stretching has been proven to help fibromyalgia and pain symptoms.
You could look into an anti-inflammatory diet to help diminish inflammatory pain.
I sometimes get knots in my neck the size of large gumballs.
I am only 44 years old and feel like I am falling apart.
I have been actively moving and remodeling, and was wondering if it's possible that I got something out of whack that could be causing this pain?
Maybe falling while I was moving things?
I was in a car accident 20 years ago, so I’m not sure if something just never went back into place.
Any info would help.
This is a very common description for fibromyalgia or myofascial pain.
This is increased muscle tension and pain of the upper and lower back.
Three things that generally help this type of pain include: aerobic exercise, dry heat, and certain medications.
I have spinal stenosis in my lower back.
The stenosis can cause neurogenic claudication.
Neurogenic claudication is a pressure on the nerves and vessels that travel with the nerves in an upright/standing/walking position that can cause pain all the way down the leg to the feet.
In 2003 I herniated a disc at C6-C7, causing left arm numbness and chest pain.
I had fusion surgery in ‘06.
I now have been diagnosed with thoracic outlet syndrome in my left arm.
Is there anything I can do to open up the thoracic outlet?
Manipulation can work on the first rib.
By balancing the first rib, you can open up the area where the artery and vein travel, which can help open up the thoracic outlet.
The chiropractor instructed me to no longer carry my wallet in my back pocket and also to sleep with a pillow between my legs.
I understand the wallet making my hips sit at a slant or downhill, but what does the pillow do?
The pillow also helps diminish the torquing of the spine that would occur if a pillow was not used.
Do inversion tables work for lower back pain or should they be avoided?
Do you recommend traction?
Inversion tables are more or less like traction.
I tell patients that want to try an inversion table to make sure they have another person in attendance to help them on and off the table.
The same is true with traction.
It may help, it may not.
Generally, you will know the first time it is used.
Good health to you all.
Learn what’s new in the treatment of arthritis, tips to avoid surgery, and what’s best for you.
Is there any test that is the absolute for diagnosing rheumatoid arthritis?
Unfortunately, there is not.
What actually causes osteoarthritis?
We unfortunately don't know what causes osteoarthritis.
There are risk factors that have been established (trauma, family history, obesity,and older age), but we don't know what actually causes it.
What can I do to reduce the possibility of having more problems in the future with other joints?
My surgeon indicated that I had years left on the other hip.
What suggestions would you have?
The current recommendations for osteoarthritis (OA) of the knees and hips include Can cartilage be 'rebuilt' or rejuvenated?
I am hopeful that one day in the future we will have medication and/or procedures that can rebuild or rejuvenate cartilage.
I am 90 years old and under the care of a rheumatologist.
In the past, my physician has drained liquid from my knee and given me cortisone injections, which provided some short-term relief.
He does not feel he can give me any additional injections of this type.
He wants me to consider knee replacement surgery.
I cannot imagine a good result at my age from knee surgery.
I am particularly thinking of a disease called gout or pseudogout.
This can develop in older folks and the knees are a common location.
One can see evidence of pseudogout on an X-ray (a condition called chondrocalcinosis).
However, the best test for gout or pseudogout is to look for crystals in the synovial fluid.
If you have a different type of arthritis than OA, you might need medication that reduces inflammation.
What is the difference in symptoms between osteoarthritis of the shoulder and rotator cuff issues?
The truth is that they can go hand in hand.
The rotator cuff is a group of muscles that surround the shoulder joint.
They help to keep the ball placed in the socket of the shoulder joint.
If the rotator cuff gets injured (through trauma or degeneration), it can cause pain and an inability to move the arm (particularly lift the arm).
Rotator cuff problems can lead to osteoarthritis.
Osteoarthritis of the shoulder is the bony degenerative changes that happen to the shoulder joint.
You can get osteoarthritis of the shoulder without having rotator cuff problems.
I am a 54-year-old woman who was diagnosed with osteoarthritis in my finger joints nine years ago.
The Heberden's nodes in the pinky finger of my right hand have become painful.
Recently, an orthopaedic surgeon told me the joints were almost 100 percent fused in that finger.
The only treatment would be either pain medications or joint fusion surgery.
Is there anything else I can do, especially for my pinky finger?
I've tried Capsaicin cream and Aspercreme® .
I've increased my Omega 3s and D3, which have helped.
I agree that surgery often is the last resort.
Unfortunately, there are no medical treatments approved that can help reverse osteoarthritis.
If distal finger joints are almost fused in one finger, would steroid injections still be helpful for the pain caused by Heberden's nodes?
I think cortisone injection therapy in these joints is generally difficult.
Often, however, it is hard to get into the joint and - sometimes - the injections don't work.
I have osteoarthritis of the knee that causes me to limp.
Is there anything other than a knee replacement that might help?
I have osteoarthritis and have been trying to lose some weight to help my knees feel better.
I already ice after exercise, but it doesn't help much.
Exercises that do not produce high impact on the knee joints are preferred.
In this case, stationary bikes are better than treadmills.
Water exercises can be very helpful.
Doing exercises to strengthen the thigh muscles - under the supervision of a physical therapist or trainer in a gym - are recommended.
How do you determine whether to recommend steroid or hyaluronic injections for osteoarthritis of the knee?
Is this a treatment of last resort before replacement surgery?
A lot depends on physician preference and patient experience.
Steroids might work a little faster, and hyaluronic acid might last a little longer.
You are right that injections are often tried before surgery is considered.
I have recently been diagnosed with inflammatory arthritis in my ankles.
Is this the same as rheumatoid arthritis?
Also, the lateral edges of my feet (one more than the other) are experiencing pain that is most severe upon waking and walking.
How is this connected with the joints?
There are different types of inflammatory arthritis.
Rheumatoid arthritis is one of them.
From the brief message you sent, it is hard to tell what type of arthritis you have.
The inflammation can involve structures around the joints.
That is particularly true for inflammatory arthritis that we group in the class of spondyloarthritis (meaning arthritis involving the back and peripheral joints).
These include reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease related-arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis.
You should see a rheumatologist to see which type of arthritis you have.
Deformities of the big toes can be very painful.
Unfortunately once the damage is done, surgery is often the only option left.
You can help prevent the development of these deformities by wearing comfortable (wide) shoes rather than high-heels.
Certain orthotics can also be custom made to help with the pain when walking.
I understand hyaluronic acid injections are approved for knee “use.”
Is this treatment approved and effective for foot/ankle joint and arthritis issues?
You are right that hyaluronic acid is approved for knee osteoarthritis.
It is the only joint, however.
There are no medications that are specifically approved for the ankle or foot.
Cortisone injections can be used in the ankle.
Has the FDA approved viscosupplementation injections for the ankle?
I know it is really effective for relieving knee pain.
I wanted to pursue other treatment options for secondary osteoarthritis in my left ankle.
I have tried many different types of NSAIDs, and nothing seems to be helping with the pain and swelling.
I am a very young and active person, but being on the ankle after a short period of time seems to be slowing me down with regard to my daily activities.
I tried a support brace but found that it was not very helpful.
The physical therapy I tried didn’t seem to help either.
Some of them were promising, others were not.
When would you use the steroids and when would you use the hyaluronic injection?
Personally (no evidence behind it!)
I often try a steroid injection first and see what happens.
I know, however, that other physicians often use hyaluronic acid.
I have rheumatoid arthritis.
Is there anything safer/better to use than methotrexate?
Methotrexate really has been the "workhorse" for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in the last years.
It is very safe and effective when used properly (with regular lab monitoring, no alcohol use, etc.).
Some patients need additional medication if methotrexate does not control their RA or if they have side-effects from the medication.
It is the drug of choice to start with in the current guidelines.
To help alleviate joint/arthritis pain resulting from a traumatic foot injury, I recently started taking oral supplements that include MSM, chicken collagen type II, and hyaluronic acid.
There is great debate whether these supplements work or not.
Some guidelines (2010) recommend against them.
I usually don't prescribe them, but if they help patients, I tend not to stop them either.
However, if you spend a lot of money on them and they don't help, there is no need to continue them.
I had a serious infusion reaction during my second session with Rituxan® .
I am now very sensitive to steroid shots or prednisone.
It makes my blood pressure rise quickly and I never had that problem before.
The infusion was almost four months ago.
I am now on Cimzia® .
Could I take blood pressure medication at the same time to even out the reaction?
I am sharing your concern for future reactions to medicine.
However, as the body itself produces steroids, true adverse reactions to the drug itself (and not other medications you received with the drug) are very rare.
I think you will be able to tolerate steroids in the future, but you will need to be closely monitored with the first dose.
You should discuss this with your rheumatologist.
I just began Cimzia®  injections for rheumatoid arthritis.
I will be getting my third set soon.
However it varies between individuals.
So, it really doesn't matter whether you take acetaminophen or etodolac - either will help control pain - but neither will slow the progression of the osteoarthritis.
We often recommend acetaminophen (Tylenol) to older folks because NSAIDs have a higher risk of damaging the kidneys and causing bleeding in the stomach.
Acetaminophen carries the risk of liver damage if taken in too high doses.
I have severe tinnitus from sulfasalazine.
Does that mean I am allergic to sulfa drugs?
I suggest you contact an ear, nose and throat physician since they are specialists in tinnitus.
It will be important to be examined for all reasons of tinnitus.
Do NSAIDs actually slow the progression of arthritis?
They unfortunately do not.
Do you recommend glucosamine and chondroitin supplements to promote joint health in the elderly?
However, as these are generally safe and well-tolerated, I do not stop them if they help patients.
If they don't help you, you do not need to spend the money.
Are there significant risks?
I briefly reviewed the evidence and found a Cochrane Review (high-quality reviews) from 2004 that stated the following: “There is conflicting evidence regarding the efficacy of prolotherapy injections in reducing pain and disability in patients with chronic low-back pain.
There was no evidence that prolotherapy injections alone were more effective than control injections alone.
However, in the presence of co-interventions, prolotherapy injections were more effective than control injections, more so when both injections and co-interventions were controlled concurrently.”
Is it an effective supplement to traditional treatment?
The guidelines currently don't recommend for or against it.
I was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) about eight years ago.
For the last two years I have been battling with alopecia totalis.
Are there connections with the diseases?
Do you have any suggestions?
My RA has been well-controlled.
Autoimmune diseases can occur together.
I would recommend you see a dermatologist who specializes in alopecia to see whether there are other treatments available.
