Both increase the monthly pregnancy rate from about 2 percent with unexplained infertility to about 10 percent with IUI.
Both have about a 5 percent to 10 percent risk for twins.
I've read that Clomid® can negatively affect cervical mucus.
Does this reverse once a patient has stopped taking Clomid® ?
Is this also a problem with Femara® ?
While Clomid® may negatively affect cervical mucus, it may not be of any clinical concern.
In any case, Femara® does not affect the cervical mucus.
The bigger concern with Clomid® is that it may make the uterine lining less receptive.
Some showed higher pregnancy rates, some no difference, and one even showed lower pregnancy rates.
How critical is diet to embryo quality; for example, eating many fruits and vegetables, no caffeine, etc.?
It is recommended that alcohol and caffeine be limited, and both partners need to stop smoking.
What role does weight play (both being overweight or underweight) in infertility?
Is it the same for men and women?
Extremes of weight, both under and over, reduce fertility in both men and women.
How does a couple choose a fertility specialist or institution?
What do you look for?
You should check to see that the fertility doctors are board certified reproductive endocrinologists.
This means they have spent several years obtaining additional training in infertility beyond a general OB/GYN residency.
You can check the national IVF registry to see the number of cycles performed annually and the success rates by the women's age.
Any changes in the menstrual cycles that last for more than two to three months should be evaluated by your gynecologist.
Some women have no etiologies detected; however, medication may be used during the menstrual cycle to decrease menstrual flow.
There are several new medications available within the last two years that may dramatically decrease menstrual bleeding and solve your problem without surgical intervention.
Why did my heavy bleeding start again after having a D&C?
The evaluation of heavy uterine bleeding has evolved.
It is important that a component of surgery and evaluation includes hysteroscopy.
This test should be coupled with a D&C so that the physician can view the area of menstruation.
A D&C alone is not diagnostic or therapeutic.
Therefore, if you have already undergone a surgical D&C, I would recommend that you restart another office evaluation with a saline infusion sonogram.
This comprehensive visualization will more thoroughly evaluate causes of bleeding.
A D&C alone may have missed a focal growth that can contribute to heavy menstrual periods.
Please feel free to contact my office to schedule a consultation, and I will determine the next steps.
What are the most common signs that you are going into menopause?
Symptoms of menopause often begin before the last menstrual period.
Many women experience no symptoms and others have variable symptoms.
Changes in menstrual cycles (skipping periods, more than one period a month, change in menstrual flow, including duration and amount) often occur one to seven years before the periods stop.
Additionally, hot flashes, night sweats, vaginal dryness, decreased libido, and change in mood and memory can occur.
Since hitting menopause three years ago, I have no libido.
I am not on any HRT, just taking one day at a time through the flashes and anxiety attacks.
Will my libido ever return; and even though it doesn't bother me that it is gone, do I need medical attention for this?
It is common that libido decreases with aging.
Currently, there are no FDA-approved medications for decreased libido.
There are other causes for decreased libido, including an underactive thyroid gland, elevated prolactin levels, depression, alcohol abuse, and an unsatisfactory interpersonal relationship with your sexual partner.
All of these issues and more should be discussed with a physician.
Please consider getting a second opinion with a urogynecologist who has experience with pelvic floor dysfunction following pelvic reconstruction surgery and mesh procedures.
When having sex, I am now experiencing vaginal dryness.
Is there a way to treat this without just using creams during sex?
You are considered perimenopausal.
This means that your estrogen levels are changing.
Due to a decline in estrogen, vaginal dryness is common.
A physician can prescribe an estrogen tablet, estrogen ring, or estrogen cream, which after 8 to10 weeks improves lubrication.
See your doctor for evaluation and treatment options.
I am in my 50s and am having very heavy, uncomfortable periods.
My doctor told me that my ultrasound showed I have a large uterine fibroid.
There are many options for treating heavy menstrual cycles related to uterine fibroids.
The size, number, and location of the fibroid often determine treatment options.
Hysterectomy should always be the last option.
What do you recommend for treatment of an ovarian cyst in a 49-year-old menopausal woman?
I have pain in my lower back associated with this cyst.
My mother had ovarian cancer.
Ovarian cysts are common during the reproductive years when women have menstrual cycles.
They are uncommon in menopause.
In fact, generally the ovaries are small, and in 30 percent of cases are not visualized by ultrasound.
While the majority of cysts, if found in the menopausal years, are benign (not cancerous), due to your family history, you need more follow-up and evaluation.
Characteristics of the cyst that your doctor will evaluate include size and whether the cyst has a complex or simple appearance.
Also, the doctor will determine if the cyst is growing rapidly.
My daughter is 16 and has just started birth control to help with heavy and erratic periods.
She chose to have the depo shots.
How long is it safe for her to be on the shots or birth control in general?
It is great that your daughter is using an effective means to control her menstrual cycles.
Depo-Provera shots -- as well as oral contraceptive pills, patches, contraceptive vaginal rings and Implanon -- are safe and effective long-term solutions for menstrual control and pregnancy prevention.
I am 43 and prone to urinary tract infections.
What can I do decrease/stop getting them?
If you have had three or more urinary tract infections within 12 months, you should see an urogynecologist to exclude an anatomic cause of an infection.
In the meantime, try to void after intercourse.
For personal hygiene, wipe from front to back.
Please exercise, eat healthy and -- despite a busy life -- please find time to smell the roses!
Banding is a symptom that is typically associated with spinal cord lesions.
Patients feel as if they are being squeezed by a band because the sensory nerves entering the spinal cord at the level of a lesion end up sending aberrant signals to the brain.
A number of different medications may help to mitigate these symptoms.
Two of the most commonly used are gabapentin (Neurontin) and pregabalin (Lyrica® ).
Can MS make headaches worse?
Headaches are seen at an increased rate in patients with MS compared to the general population.
Fortunately, there are a lot of good treatments available, both to treat an acute headache and to prevent headaches from occurring in the first place.
I would suggest discussing these with your neurologist.
If your headaches are particularly intractable, there are doctors who specialize in headache care who may be able to use special techniques, such as Botox® (onabotulinumtoxinA) injections, to prevent them.
Can shingle symptoms be worse in patients with MS?
I am not aware that MS makes shingles worse.
However, if a patient is immunocompromised from immunosuppressants (which are rarely but sometimes used to treat MS in the U.S.), I think the shingles might be more severe than otherwise.
What's the best way to keep sinuses healthy during the cold and flu season?
I had an infection that is believed to have caused a relapse but don't like constantly being on antibiotics or nasal steroids.
I am not aware of any specific strategies for this other than washing your hands frequently and trying to avoid contact with sick people.
I would recommend the flu vaccine in MS patients.
(It is important to avoid the live vaccine if you are immunocompromised, however.)
If you are having frequent sinus infections, it may be worth speaking with an ENT doctor to make sure there is no underlying cause for this.
What does breakthrough disease on interferons mean?
Breakthrough disease is a term often employed when a patient has disease activity despite treatment (with interferons or other agents).
This could be manifested as a relapse or changes on the MRI.
What are the effects of pregnancy on MS?
Pregnancy appears to have a protective effect in patients with multiple sclerosis.
This is one of the reasons why estrogen is being investigated as a treatment for the disease.
Patients are often at risk for a "rebound" relapse after the delivery of their babies, however, so I typically recommend resuming disease modifying therapy as soon as possible.
What role does stress play in MS?
Stress is not known to specifically worsen MS, but we all know stress has a negative impact on our general health.
As we have discussed above, it is very important to maintain your general health when you have MS because it helps you to better cope with the disease.
Thus, stress reduction is key.
Are there complications associated with having joint replacement for someone with MS?
My father has progressive MS and needs a knee replacement.
I am not aware of any specific complications associated with this procedure in MS patients.
Your father may have a longer recovery time than the average person because of motor dysfunction from the MS, but otherwise I do not see a contraindication to the procedure.
What are your thoughts on seeing a chiropractor and MS?
Chiropractors typically gear their treatments toward the joints in the spine.
MS does not affect the joints, but instead affects the spinal cord itself.
Therefore, I do not think that seeing a chiropractor would be specifically beneficial for your MS. If you have comorbid arthritis in your back, it may be helpful, but I would suggest letting your neurologist/PCP know that you are seeing a chiropractor.
Is there a commonly used system that rates the progression of the disease?
MS is typically classified into one of four types: relapsing-remitting, secondary progressive, primary progressive, or progressive relapsing.
I have read that the DMD are only good at holding off the progression of MS for approximately 10 years.
The disease modifying drugs (DMD) that we currently have are most effective in the early (relapsing-remitting) form of multiple sclerosis.
Benefits in the later stages of MS (secondary progressive) are more modest and typically restricted to patients who are still experiencing relapses.
Because of this, we often think that patients have a "window of opportunity" early in the disease in which we can make a clear impact with treatment.
The benefits of this early treatment are still being evaluated, but it is thought that this may prevent development of secondary progressive MS and accumulation of disability.
Many patients with progressive MS may derive benefit from pulse corticosteroid treatment (IV steroids typically given every few months).
Are there any treatments recommended for secondary progressive MS?
Unfortunately, secondary progressive multiple sclerosis is very difficult to treat.
As I said, some patients do get benefit with pulse corticosteroids, and this is a strategy I often employ.
Methotrexate and IVIG are sometimes employed for SPMS treatment, but the evidence for these agents is not robust.
I go off for a month or two then try again with same short-term results.
As you may know, Ampyra® (dalfampridine) works by blocking potassium channels, which helps demyelinated nerves to conduct their electrical signals.
I have not heard this specific observation from any of my patients on Ampyra® .
Theoretically, if it caused a shift in the expression of these channels on your nerves, the benefit may be attenuated after taking it for a long period of time.
This is just a thought, though, and I do not know of any scientific evidence to back it up.
Can you take Gilenya™if you have had herpes simplex (fever blisters)?
This is not an absolute contraindication for Gilenya™(fingolimod), but because Gilenya™seems to suppress the immune system, I would be worried that outbreaks may increase.
I would recommend discussing it with your neurologist and perhaps an infectious diseases specialist before going on Gilenya™.
What are the long-term side effects of continued use of Rebif® ?
Rebif® (interferon beta-1a) has been in use for the treatment of MS for around 15 years.
We are not aware of any major adverse effects that come with using it for a long period of time.
You should be followed to make sure it does not cause any elevations in your liver enzymes or decreases in your blood counts, which can happen with any of the interferons.
The efficacy of Rebif® is not thought to diminish over time.
However, some patients can develop antibodies to the drug, which will neutralize its effects.
If patients have breakthrough disease on interferons, it is always important to check them for neutralizing antibodies.
What are "neuroprotective agents"?
A neuroprotective agent is any drug that helps to prevent MS patients from losing neurons in their brain or spinal cord.
There is loss of brain volume in MS patients because the neurons are injured and degenerate.
It is thought that this type of damage underlies the more persistent disability that can be seen in MS patients.
Does chemotherapy have any effect on a person's MS?
My aunt has MS and was just diagnosed with breast cancer.
I am not aware of chemotherapies making MS worse.
Some chemotherapies have an immunosuppressive effect, and because of this, have been used to treat MS, which is an autoimmune disease.
My recommendation for your aunt would be to go forward with the treatment for her breast cancer.
There are a number of different things that could be causing this, and I would recommend that you have it evaluated by your local doctor.
The doctor will want to rule out musculoskeletal issues or a clot in your leg called a DVT (deep vein thrombosis).
MS itself can cause similar pains, which we term neuropathic pain.
If other causes are excluded, it may be reasonable to try an agent for neuropathic pain, such as gabapentin or carbamazepine.
I have had MS for about 10 years.
Concussion symptoms have abated but have not gone away completely.
My guess is that this is probably post-concussive syndrome.
Patients who already have underlying neurological dysfunction (as may occur with MS) may be at greater risk for symptoms after suffering a concussion.
I definitely would recommend being evaluated by your doctor to exclude any serious injury that may have occurred with the trauma.
What causes the stabbing pain in the eye commonly found in MS patients?
Are there suggestions for relief?
There are a number of things that can cause this.
One concern would be optic neuritis, which is a common symptom in MS patients.
It typically manifests with visual impairment and eye pain with movement.
It would be important to be evaluated for this, as IV corticosteroids are a good treatment for optic neuritis.
It could also represent a headache phenomenon, such as a migraine.
Migraine prophylactic agents such as Topamax® (topiramate), Tegretol (carbamazepine)  Effexor® (venlafaxine), or a number of other agents could be of benefit.
Are there nutritional aspects to MS?
There is not clear evidence that a specific type of diet will help to prevent MS relapses or disability accumulation.
However, patients who maintain their overall general health tend to do better.
Thus, I typically recommend to my patients a diet low in saturated fats and plenty of exercise.
Keeping comorbidities -- such as hypertension, diabetes, and high cholesterol -- in check are also likely to produce better outcomes in terms of your MS. In terms of exercise, what types of exercises do you recommend?
I recommend that patients with MS get a good balance of cardio activity as well as strength training.
What wellness issues are made worse or are harder to take care of due to the MS?
I would say that the most difficult issue to take care of is exercise because of the motor deficits that can occur with MS, as well as the fatigue associated with the disease.
Trying to stay active and fit from the very beginning will help to manage this problem.
Another important wellness consideration in MS patients is depression, which can be seen at a higher frequency than in the general population.
We screen all our patients for depression prior to each visit and have a low threshold for recommending antidepressants, psychological counseling, or other interventions if any red flags show up.
Dealing with fatigue is a serious issue with me.
Any advice on how to stay active when you're just too tired?
One thing that is important when dealing with fatigue in MS is to make sure that there isn't something else causing it.
I like to screen all patients who complain of fatigue for other issues -- such as hypothyroidism, anemia, or vitamin deficiencies.
What are the most recommended nutritional supplements for MS patients?
I do not recommend specific supplements, but it is important to make sure you do not have any vitamin deficiencies.
Low vitamin D seems to be a risk factor for MS, so I check all my patients' vitamin D levels.
If it is low, I give them high dose supplementation to make sure it gets back into the normal range.
It is also important to check vitamin B12 and folate, as these may produce neurological symptoms that could mistakenly be attributed to MS. Finally, if you are receiving steroids frequently for MS, it is important to take calcium supplements with vitamin D, as steroids can cause bone loss.
How important is hydration?
With frequent urination a chore.
From an MS standpoint, I do not think that excessive hydration is necessary.
I would recommend normal water intake in order to keep yourself and your kidneys healthy.
Some patients who are on interferons find that drinking a lot of water helps to mitigate the flu-like side effects that can come with these injections.
My MS symptoms went away when I was pregnant.
How would I participate?
What is the latest on CCSVI?
Who should consider it?
He found that 100 percent of MS patients had certain problems with their veins and 100 percent of controls did not.
In fact, there have been a number of complications from the procedure, including at least one death, and patients in whom the stents migrated to other parts of their bodies.
This may not be the case at many of the "boutique" clinics where CCSVI procedures are offered.
Is this an MS treatment?
Upright MRI is not a treatment for MS. It allows MR imaging of the body in positions other than lying flat on your back in an MRI machine.
This type of imaging is most likely to be useful in assessing musculoskeletal issues, and I do not see a clear application for imaging MS patients.
What do you think will be the biggest potential breakthrough in treating MS in the next 12 months, 24 months?
It appears to be effective and does not have the same safety concerns that are present with some of the other medications.
Another IV drug called alemtuzumab is in development.
It is very effective in suppressing the inflammation that is associated with MS, but can sometimes cause adverse effects, particularly with the thyroid.
I am hoping we will make some progress on neuroprotective agents, which may be very helpful in patients with progressive disease.
The safety of stem cell treatment is also being investigated and is very exciting.
Are there additional screenings or changes in screening timelines recommended for people with MS?
Patients on certain MS medications should also have certain lab parameters monitored, such as their liver enzymes.
I am a family physician, so I can use 'regular' medicine.
I will initiate medical care if I feel it is necessary.
Many integrated medicine physicians are not MDs and are not affiliated with any hospital and cannot prescribe medications.
If low libido is a result of perimenopause or menopausal issues, we use supplements for this.
Some supplements can also be used to help the physical effects of stress, which can have an impact on libido.
People have sleep disorders and are too fatigued to have a healthy libido.
I can help them with sleep.
We also provide holistic psychotherapies.
A lot depends on the cause of the decreased libido.
We get a detailed history, including all medications, supplements and current diagnosis, review labs, and order labs as needed.
A big part of the history will focus on the GYN part of the history and factors that may decrease libido -- medical and emotional.
My job is to make sure the patient is physically well for sexual activity and that there is nothing medically interfering with their libido.
What causes low libido from a Western perspective?
There are psychological factors There are organic factors There are lifestyle factors Prescriptive medication will oftentimes have an adverse effect on libido.
AEs: antihypertensives, antidepressants, opiates (Opiates can alter male hormones, lower testosterone after prolonged exposure to high doses.)
What effect does age (e.g., 80) have on libido?
Aging should not mean that you lose your libido, but with age comes low hormonal levels and chronic disease, which can affect your libido.
If loss of libido is an issue to an 80-year-old, we would take it seriously in a consultation.
I also recommend patients see an MD as well to rule out any organic factors (low testosterone, Diabetes, etc.).
Oftentimes with diabetes, I am managing complications of the disease (i.e., peripheral neuropathy), but I do not treat the diabetes directly.
I’ve been on antidepressants for several years, and it has seriously decreased my libido.
Changing meds is not an option, since it took a long time to find the right combination that works for me.
We can make sure that there are no problems with the thyroid or nutrition or continued anxiety, sleep disorders, vitamin deficiencies, etc.
Holistic psychotherapy is also a good option.
With women (and men?), low libido could be linked to low self-image—not feeling attractive enough, etc.
In addition to antidepressants, opiates and antihypertensives are common prescriptions that can cause low libido.
If you can decrease the need for medication, then the side effects lessen.
Ever since I went through menopause, I haven’t had much interest in sex.
I don’t want to go on hormone replacement.
It helps with all menopausal symptoms - hot flashes and low libido specifically.
We can also consider phytoestrogen or phyto progesterones and DHEA.
I treat patients at the root level of disharmony.
From a Western sense, we are engaging in the body’s parasympathetic nervous system, which influences the relaxation response, helping patients to deal with stress, induce calm, working towards stopping that fight or flight response (which we all find ourselves in when we’re stressed out!).
The brains releases endorphins and dopamine (brain chemicals that enhance mood).
When your mood improves, you desire for sex becomes greater.
When I look at the list of organic, psychological and even lifestyle factors that cause low libido, I see things that can be addressed with a multidisciplinary approach, of which I’m a huge proponent.
You mentioned that you look at the tongue in the initial exam - why?
In traditional Chinese medicine, the tongue is an integral part of diagnosing a patient.
There are a lot of things that we look at on the tongue itself that tell us a lot about what is going on in the body that help us formulate a diagnosis.
We look at things like the color of the tongue body, how wet or dry it is, the coating, the color of the coating, teeth marks, fissures, etc.
I observe different parts of the tongue as well.
Depending on what we see, it helps us to hone in on traditional Chinese Medical diagnosis.
What happens during a treatment?
I take a holistic approach when seeing patients, so every little thing matters when I’m trying to diagnose from an Eastern medical perspective.
Even if you feel that it does not relate to your main complaint, it definitely matters to me.
No two patients are treated the same way.
The points in which I would insert a needle may be different for each patient.
The diagnosis from a traditional Chinese medical perspective, which could be manifesting as a low libido, can be different for each patient.
Are they ever put into a person's sexual organs/areas?
Usually, the needles are placed in the limbs, abdomen and perhaps in the ears or on the head.
In my clinical experience, I have never needled those areas.
What does it feel like, will it hurt?
The needles are incredibly fine and slender, about the size of a strand of hair.
You may or may not feel an initial prick, or a tickle, but most patients feel very little.
If you feel discomfort, TELL ME!!!
How many treatments will you need before you see results?
Patients have variable responses.
I generally recommend 5 to 10 treatments as a course, on a one week interval.
I then reassess after a full course of treatment.
How soon after treatment begins are results usually noticeable?
Do patients tend to need repeated treatments over time or for "maintenance"?
Generally maintenance is a good idea, whether it be once a month or every few months, or even just as needed.
Insurance coverage is variable.
Patients can call their insurance company directly or speak to someone at the Center for Integrative Medicine.
If organic cause of ED (ex: prostatitis), I would refer to urologist for evaluation.
If ED is due to stress/anxiety/side effects of medications mentioned in the webchat, then I would address the root condition with the goal of improvement of ED as secondary benefit.
I have multiple food allergies, some of which result in hives and others in GI symptoms.
Hives and other GI symptoms will sometimes improve as a side benefit but I generally do not address food allergies specifically.
Are there alternatives for those of us who would prefer not to take drugs [risedronate (Actonel® ) or alendronate (Fosamax® )]?
My doctor is very adamant that I take Fosamax.
She says I am at high risk because I am white and thin (132 lbs).
I have been diagnosed with osteoporosis of the spine; my hips are okay.
I am 68 years old and have no history of osteoporosis on my maternal side; one aunt on my paternal side had osteoporosis.
I have been on/off Fosamax for over a year and have experienced side effects.
Prior to that, I took Actonel for several years.
I exercise daily and take calcium and Vitamin D. My general practitioner told me that taking calcium does no good.
I feel I'm being pro-active for my health, but what else can I do aside from take drugs?
Unfortunately, although calcium and vitamin D supplements are important, drugs are needed if patients have osteoporosis to treat the disease.
In terms of whether you need osteoporosis drugs at this point in time, it depends on whether your bone density test is stable and how long total that you have been on either Actonel or Fosamax.
A urine test, called urine NTX, can be used to determine if previous medications are effective.
I'm 57 years old, post-menopausal, with multiple sclerosis and celiac disease.
My father had Paget's disease.
My mother had osteoporosis and celiac disease.
I was on Fosamax for 10 years, switched to calcitonin salmon nasal spray (Miacalcin® ) after that.
Recent DEXA testing showed osteoporosis in spine, osteopenia in hips.
What should I be doing now for the osteoporosis?
Since you were on Fosamax for 10 years, the most important two things to determine are whether the Fosamax is still having an effect since it has been stopped and if your bone density is stable or not.
If the bone density is stable, and you were on Fosamax for 10 years, nothing may need to be done unless a urine test called urine NTX shows that you are losing the effects from previous Fosamax use.
Should I continue the Miacalcin, or is it ineffective?
Miacalcin does help increase your bone density but does not help prevent fractures.
I would need to know results for your bone density tests and other medical history to see if you should continue it.
Does having had a zoledronic acid (Reclast® ) infusion offset these?
How does a family history of severe osteoporosis contribute?
Is Citracal®  slow-release calcium adequate (2 pills/day) as a supplement?
My bone density numbers are slowly going down, and I have had two stress fractures in the last 3 to 4 years.
I also had cortisone shots in my back for osteoarthritis over several years.
Products like Prilosec, Nexium, famotidine (Pepcid® ), and ranitidine (Zantac® ) are all antacids that can decrease the absorption of certain types of calcium supplements.
To be safest, you can either ingest your calcium in your diet by eating/drinking food that is high in calcium, like skim milk and dark green leafy vegetables, or you can take a calcium citrate supplement instead of calcium carbonate.
Calcium citrate does not need an acidic environment to be absorbed and thus should not interfere with Prilosec, Nexium, etc.
Reclast should not change this.
Family history dramatically increases a person's own risk of osteoporosis and bone breaks/fractures, but does not necessarily weigh in on the calcium absorption issue above.
I recommend doing a calcium calculator, of which many can be found online by searching "calcium calculators" to find out exactly how much calcium you are likely taking in your diet and how much you then would need in a supplement to make up the difference.
Postmenopausal women need 1200-1500 mg calcium/day.
If you are taking enough calcium, taking enough vitamin D and getting Reclast, and you are still breaking bones, you should likely be checked for other causes of osteoporosis, called secondary causes, which may be missed.
Doctors who specialize in bone health, such as women's health doctors, rheumatologists, and endocrinologists, can all help to guide such an evaluation and next best treatment steps.
I have osteoporosis and severe acid reflux.
I am off the Nexium that had an impact on my back (curving), but I am taking 20 mg. of Pepcid twice a day to keep the reflux in check.
Also, taking large doses of calcium really aggravates my stomach.
First, will taking the 2 doses of Pepcid a day have the same effect as the Nexium?
Is it the reduction of acid or the medication that causes the mal-absorption?
What medication do you recommend for patients with both conditions?
I feel like I have to choose between my stomach and my bones!
Please tell us how you treat people with severe acid reflux and osteoporosis.
Is taking two 20mg doses of Pepcid every day the same as taking a proton-pump inhibitor (PPI)?
I recommend that patients try to get their calcium preferably from their diet, rather than supplements, when possible.
For some, it is too hard to do, especially those with lactose intolerance, as dairy products have the most calcium concentrations.
If a supplement is needed, calcium citrate is a type of calcium supplement that does not need an acidic environment in the stomach to be absorbed and can be used when antacids are necessary.
Both Reclast and Prolia prevent bone from being reabsorbed as fast as it is currently being reabsorbed, leading you to have osteoporosis.
Prolia is stronger than Reclast and may actually help you make more bone.
Both of these medications are better alternatives than the pills due to the reflux.
Please comment on medications appropriate for restoring bone density.
I have very low testosterone levels that have been causing loss of bone density.
I am using testosterone gel (Testim® ) rubbed on my shoulders and calcitonin nasal spray.
Dr__Su: Appropriate medications for treatment of low bone density depend on how low the bone density is and whether you have fractured any bones.
In addition to treating low testosterone level, medications such as Reclast, Boniva, Actonel, or Fosamax may be needed to treat low bone density.
But if you already had fractures related to bone density, medications such as teriparatide (rDNA origin) (Forteo® ) or denosumab (Prolia® ) may be more appropriate.
Choice also depends on other concurrent medical conditions that you are being treated for.
Do you think Prolia is safe and effective for treating osteoporosis in an 82-year-old female?
What drug do you think is the most effective?
Prolia is an agent that has come available last year and has been used with success to date to treat certain patients with osteoporosis that are at high risk for fracture.
Generally, as aging is one of the most significant risk factors for aging and that Prolia can be used even if kidney function is reduced, which is also common in the elderly, it is generally a very nice option.
In general, I recommend that all therapy for bone should be individualized after a thorough history, physical, and lab testing is done as well as discussion with a patient's individual preferences.
In general, all of the therapies for bone are safe, especially so if tailored based off of an individual's risk profile.
I have several spinal fractures which are causing pain.
Would a testosterone patch applied to the fracture site on my back be likely to ease pain and help the condition?
I understand of course that I would need a prescription for the patch.
I have received zoledronic acid (Zometa® ) infusions every other month for nearly two years, but they do not seem to be having any effect.
Spinal fractures, unfortunately, can as you well know, cause significant pain.
When one vertebra breaks, it causes a change in the positioning of the spine and can put stress on the vertebra above and below, causing more pain and increasing the risk of breaks in other vertebra as well.
Testosterone therapy is not used to treat the pain from osteoporosis but rather if there is low testosterone levels as a cause from OP.
You should, if you have not already, have a full secondary evaluation to find out if there is a specific condition that is causing your low bone density and breaks.
Given that you have been on Fosamax for 15 years, you should probably go off Fosamax.
Whether you need to be on another medication instead depends on the trend of your bone density test results.
What is more important on your recent bone density is change from last bone density rather than T-score.
If bone density is stable based on actual bone mass numbers, then no alternative medication needs to be started when going off Fosamax.
If there is decrease in bone mass, another medication needs to be started instead of Fosamax.
I am off the Nexium that had an impact on my back (curving) but I am taking 20 mg. of Pepcid twice a day to keep the reflux in check.
Also taking large doses of calcium really aggravates my stomach.
Will taking the 2 doses of Pepcid a day have the same effect as the Nexium?
The curving in your back may or may not be related to Nexium.
If it's scoliosis, where curvature is to right or left, than it is probably not related to osteoporosis.
If it is a humpback type of curving, then it may be related to osteoporosis.
If Nexium played a role in osteoporosis, it is likely minor compared to other risks.
Medications like Nexium are probably better than Pepcid in terms of blocking acid.
The reduction of acid may impair absorption of calcium carbonate types of calcium contributing to osteoporosis.
In your case, I would use Nexium if needed for reflux and treat your osteoporosis as appropriate, with first treatment recommendation being Reclast.
Reclast, being an intravenous medication, does not make reflux worse.
