Any contraindications or side effects for Reclast & how often is it administered?
Reclast is a bisphosphonate (BPS), similar to Fosamax, Actonel, ibandronate (Boniva), etc.
It is conveniently given once yearly via a brief intravenous infusion and makes treatment very easy.
In general, it is extremely safe, as all of these medications are, as they are very specific to the bone.
Patients who have very low kidney function should avoid Reclast and all of the BPS.
Like any medication, it is not for everyone.
A small subset of patients who have never had prior exposure to BPS can get brief flu-like symptoms (achiness) with the first infusion which does not usually recur with future infusions.
Patients are encouraged to drink lots of water the day of and following the infusion and try acetaminophen to minimize any symptoms.
Patients with low calcium or low vitamin D levels should not get it until those levels are restored to normal.
My wife is taking Forteo and is -4.
She started 2 weeks ago.
How long before any signs of improvement?
In general, bone density is only one way, and the most common way, we follow an individual's risk of breaking a bone and response to medications to prevent such breaks.
Changes in bone density, though, are slow and take a while to be seen on a bone density test.
This is why a bone density will not likely be recommended, even if she is on treatment, until 2 years later.
In the meantime, some doctors use markers of bone breakdown, which are urine and/or blood tests, to help follow response during treatment.
These can be checked more frequently to see if there is a response, but these tend to be tricky to measure and interpret, and are thus sometimes less accurate.
This doesn't mean that she has to wait two years to see benefits.
There is not an ideal way to measure this reduction, though, other than the tests mentioned above.
What is the latest thinking on hormone replacement therapy and bone density?
Given the health risks of cancer and cardiovascular events associated with hormone replacement therapy, it is no longer recommended as first-line treatment for women with low bone density.
Usually bisphosphonates are recommended as first-line treatment for women with low bone density.
It is recommended that people take a break from Fosamax after using it for many years.
Is this also true for raloxifene (Evista® )?
The concept of taking "drug holidays" after many years of treatment with bone agents is somewhat new and not completely validated yet.
Bone breakdown markers did start to increase after stopping risedronate in that group.
Evista is usually used for 5 years as well.
Getting adequate calcium and vitamin D is necessary throughout a person’s entire life.
The recommendation for first-line treatment is most likely going to be a bisphosphonate such as Reclast, Boniva, or Actonel.
All of these medications are effective for treatment of hip fractures if that is how diagnosis of osteoporosis was made.
If there is a hip fracture, and there is bone density showing osteoporosis, then Forteo or Prolia would be the first-line treatment over bisphosphonates.
In 2008 I had a DXA.
My hips were normal, spine -1.5.
I have been on tamoxifen for 4 and 1/2 years.
I reached menopause in 2007, the same year I started the tamoxifen.
How soon should I be retested?
My mother has osteoporosis but has not had a hip fracture.
I occasionally use inhaled corticosteroids if I have an asthma flare-up, but that is usually only a few weeks per year.
No history of fracture except a couple broken toes.
Tamoxifen can actually improve bone density, as it is in the same class as a medication approved to treat osteoporosis, Evista/raloxifene.
As tamoxifen is usually stopped after 5 years of therapy, you may consider getting another baseline DXA /bone density test when you are completing therapy with the tamoxifen and then again 2 years after that to check for losses.
You should get that DXA if at all possible on the same scanner, so that you can tell if there are losses or not.
How does a history of taking tamoxifen for 5 years, post breast cancer, increase my development of osteoporosis?
The other powerful anti-estrogen treatments for breast cancer, like letrozole (Femara® ), which are often started after 5 years of tamoxifen treatment, can decrease bone density significantly, though.
Many might consider actually starting a preventative bone agent during such treatment to help preserve bone density during such therapy, which usually lasts 5 years. rthrboutdrs: What drug do you see (without adverse effects) as the best to rebuild bone?
In general, most all of the medications for bone are safe.
As with all medications, including vitamins and supplements, everything comes with risks and benefits, and choosing between these should be individually tailored to an individual's profile, risks, other illnesses/conditions, and preferences.
Cost is another consideration.
Not all of the medications for bone act on the same areas of bone or reduce hip fractures.
Thus, choosing if you need a bone agent and then choosing the right medication for you, really has to be based on a discussion with a doctor who has knowledge of the different agents, like a women's health specialist, rheumatologist, or endocrinologist.
To help guide the need for additional medications besides adequate calcium and vitamin D for all women in postmenopause, there is a tool that has been developed internationally called the "FRAX" tool.
Your doctor has access to it and can input your specific information and risk factors to help determine if additional bone therapy is needed.
Decisions to treat are complex and need to be individualized, as every patient has different family and other history that impacts her risk of breaking a bone.
I also would ensure you are getting enough calcium, vitamin D, and weight-bearing exercise, not smoking, and limiting alcohol intake.
Get another bone density on the same scanner in 2 years.
If it drops, then I would be especially apt to recommend a bone agent, once you were evaluated for secondary causes of osteoporosis/osteopenia/low bone density first.
Hypothyroidism and its treatment do not directly impact calcium targets that I know of.
Being over-treated and/or getting too high of a dose of thyroid supplement can cause bone loss.
Bone loss can happen also to those who have naturally overactive thyroid activity in their bodies.
First recommendation for medication would be Reclast unless there are other contraindications, depending on other medical conditions that you have.
The side effects of Fosamax (painful GERD) prevent me from taking this drug.
I have osteopenia and take Vitamin D and calcium.
What else do you recommend for 80 year old woman?
If you cannot take Fosamax because of GERD, switching to a monthly pill such as Boniva or Actonel may help with GERD symptoms.
If those also cause problems, switching to intravenous medication such as Reclast is also an alternative.
Yes, chronic steroid use can contribute to bone loss leading to osteopenia, but may not be the only reason, since you have a significant genetic risk for low bone mass.
The Rituxan should not affect your bone loss, so it should not turn osteopenia into osteoporosis.
For a 65-year-old who has osteopenia, how long does it take for a drug such as Evista to rebuild bone?
Evista actually does not help your body rebuild bone in terms of making new bone.
It actually helps your body slow down rate of bone loss so that your bone density can remain stable.
If by slowing down the rate of bone loss leads to you gaining bone through your body's natural rate of bone building, it is considered icing on the cake.
I have osteopenia and arthritis.
How can I best treat both and not have adverse drug interactions?
For treatment of osteopenia, it depends on the severity of the condition to determine whether treatment is needed.
Most medications for bone health, such as bisphosphonates (i.e., Reclast and Boniva) and anabolics (i.e., Forteo) with the exception of Prolia, should not interfere with medications for treatment of arthritis.
Interaction with Prolia is only a consideration if you are on a biologic medication for treatment of inflammatory arthritis, such as rheumatoid arthritis or psoriatic arthritis.
Can you suggest a calcium supplement that is easy to digest and does not cause constipation?
When patients experience constipation from their calcium supplement, I make several recommendations: Do you need it at all?
If you do need calcium, make sure you are not taking too much.
If you determine that you do need a calcium supplement, try one that has magnesium in it which can help to counter the constipation, unless you have kidney failure.
If you do have kidney failure, you should limit your magnesium ingestion.
I am not familiar with this specific type of calcium supplement.
There has been some suggestion, not proof, that people can take too much in the way of supplements and that some vitamins can actually be harmful, so I recommend taking the amount you need- more is not necessarily better.
Also, I do not know of any specific type of calcium that directly boosts bone density over others- that may just be marketing.
Calcium pills usually have 500-600mg of calcium per pill since your body can only absorb that amount at a time.
When taking a combination of Synthroid and calcium supplements, you can take Synthroid in the morning on empty stomach as instructed, and then take one calcium pill at lunch 3 to 4 hours after taking Synthroid and one calcium pill at dinner.
Another way to get calcium without worrying about pills is increasing the calcium in your diet.
I'm not sure if I asked this before the session, but here goes: I've been diagnosed with osteopenia.
My doctor has advised I take calcium citrate (600 mg twice a day) and Vitamin D3 (4,000 units per day for one month, and then 2,000 units per day forward).
I started this regimen, and after less than a week, I started to experience cramps and some constipation (although I did have some bowel movement every morning as before).
I notified him of this change, and he now has recommended I stop the calcium citrate and continue with the D3 dosage (2,000 units).
He said it's not uncommon to experience cramps from the calcium citrate, but shouldn't be an issue with the D3 dosage.
Does this make sense?
What are your thoughts on side effects of these supplements?
Does it matter where you buy these supplements?
I agree with your doctor's recommendations.
Calcium supplements can sometimes cause cramps.
To avoid needing to take supplements, you can take more calcium through increases in your diet with foods such as milk, yogurt, spinach, collard greens, etc.
Dietary calcium usually does not cause cramps.
There are not usually side effects with vitamin D. Location of purchase for calcium and vitamin D usually does not make a difference.
Vitamin D3 is preferred to vitamin D2.
Is Vivactiv®  an effective form of calcium supplementation?
Yes, this is a nice way to get your calcium, as they are flavored chews and taste good, so can be used as an after meal treat which can help you to remember to take it!
It should be taken immediately following a meal.
However, it contains calcium carbonate, so if you are taking an antacid, you might want to try a calcium citrate form instead.
Which calcium supplements do you recommend - Citracal®  or Caltrate® ?
Which is better absorbed for bones?
Calcium in the form of calcium citrate, such as Citracal, is better absorbed than in the form of calcium carbonate, i.e., Caltrate.
I usually recommend Citracal over Caltrate.
Why is this bad?
Increased calcium intake above 2,000 mg daily can increase risk of kidney stones, and excessive calcium intake can also predispose a person to increased atherosclerosis, leading to higher risk of heart attacks and strokes.
The goal for calcium intake is 1,200 mg to 1,500 mg daily between diet and supplements.
Slow-release Citracal®  lists calcium carbonate before calcium citrate.
Is it an adequate form of calcium?
Slow-release Citracal is an adequate form of calcium supplement.
In general, calcium citrate products are easier to absorb but are more expensive than calcium carbonate products.
Calcium citrate products are definitely recommended over calcium carbonate products for patients on medications for heartburn or ulcers such as Nexium, Prilosec, and Prevacid.
I am a certified bone density technologist and educate all my patients about calcium and Vitamin D. I saw you mentioned a calcium calculator, but I have often found errors with charts from the government and osteoporosis foundation on these varying charts.
I recommend patients look at individual labels and find the percentage of calcium listed on the label.
Add a "0" to the percentage and this will give them a more accurate amount of calcium.
It is amazing how much a different yogurt will vary within the same brand, so to tell someone that yogurt has "x" amount of calcium, as provided on these calcium calculators, just seems wrong to me.
What are your thoughts?
Kudos for helping to educate about good bone health!
I agree that there is lots of variation in such information.
Of course, as you note, this is only an estimate.
I do also encourage people to read labels, not just for calcium and D, but for sodium, calories, and fat as well.
We should all be in the habit of reading labels to know what is really in what we ingest; otherwise, it can be very deceiving.
Things we may think of as healthy, like low-fat frozen meals, often have a sodium content that would approach daily recommended totals!
If one just follows the percentage of vitamin D recommended, say in a glass of milk, you may well be getting too little of vitamin D daily.
Is taking strontium effective in treating osteoporosis?
Is eating 10 prunes a day an effective treatment for osteoporosis?
Taking strontium as an over-the-counter supplement can help in the treatment of osteoporosis.
However, it is not approved as a drug for use in the US by the FDA as it is in Europe.
Eating 10 prunes a day is not an effective treatment for osteoporosis that I am aware of.
Does weight exercise help for osteoporosis?
What is the source for types of exercise?
Weight bearing exercises, such as walking and using an elliptical machine help with osteoporosis.
Weight training with light weights to maintain muscle strength and tone to prevent falls also helps for osteoporosis.
Are back-strengthening exercises helpful?
Where can I find information about exercise routines?
Back-strengthening exercises are helpful.
What foods do you recommend that are high in calcium and promote bone density?
Foods that have good amounts of calcium include milk, ice cream, yogurt, cheese, spinach, kale, collard greens, beans (i.e., navy and lima), and almonds.
The goal for calcium intake between diet and supplements is 1,200 mg to 1,500 mg daily, but not to exceed 2.000 mg daily.
When drinking milk, as you suggested getting calcium naturally through diet, is chocolate milk okay?
I really do not like the taste of white milk, but I do like the low-fat chocolate milk.
Chocolate milk is fine.
Whether it is low-fat, skim, 2%, or whole does not make a big enough difference to matter.
Metaphor: Yogurt appears to be at least twice as high in calcium as milk.
Is this a good source of calcium?
I generally note that drinking 3 cups (i.e., 8 oz each) of skim milk daily or the equivalent can provide you with your daily intake of calcium, approximately 1,200 mg/day.
You can easily look online for charts that compare the intake of calcium/food item to help you gauge an adequate substitute if you prefer other foods to milk.
Low-fat yogurt is also generally a great source of calcium, as is low-fat cottage cheese.
Individuals, even children older than 2 years of age, do not need full fat items, especially when considering heart health.
While this condition affects both males and females, females are 10 times more likely than males to need corrective surgery for it.
What is a minor curve?One that is flexible on bending films to 25° or less.
Is there a margin of error between doctors measuring scoliosis curves?
My daughter will be 13 years old, and was diagnosed with scoliosis 2 years ago.
She wore a brace until this past March.
At time of diagnosis her main curve was 37°.
She has three curves total.
From November to March her curves progressed to 36° /46° /27°.
Her surgeon in Indiana is suggesting surgery.
Her father does not want this surgery.
He took her to a medical center in Tennessee for a second opinion, and that doctor does not recommend surgery until 50°.
The Tennessee physician measured her top two curves at 40.2° and 43.2°.
I am confused as to what to do.
I have great confidence in the Indiana surgeon.
I am afraid if we wait to do surgery, the lumbar curve may also have to be fused limiting her flexibility.
She started her period 16 months ago.
What do you suggest?A 4° to 6° of measurement error is not uncommon.
Talk to your Indiana doctor about fusion levels and his/her thoughts in this regard.
I was just diagnosed with scoliosis yesterday.
Four months after a fall down a flight of stairs, my back still continues to hurt, and I finally decided to see a chiropractor.
He did x-Rays and said the scoliosis was there.
My mom, sister, and aunt have it as well.
I never realized that 2% of the population is a big number.
I want to know why they don't take more time at doctors’ offices to test for it, and why schools don't require it as one of their tests.
Mine could have been fixed a while ago, but was never found.
X-rays result in anxiety and overtreatment for patients with subtle curves.
How can I get the ScoliScore™ test done for my daughter?
I live in Montana.
Is there anyone here that can administer it?The test is marketed by Depuy Spine.
Axiomed Spine Corporation is the company that makes the test.
Check their websites for providers.
With scoliosis, what is the best type of doctor to see?
I know someone who swears by their chiropractor and another who will never see one.
Do you need a specialist or can your general practitioner take care of it?A pediatrician or adult internist (depending upon your age) would be the best person to start with.
A very small percentage of patients with scoliosis will go onto require surgical intervention.
If your doctor deems it appropriate, sending a patient with scoliosis to a spinal expert would be warranted.
I was amazed to find the invitation for this chat in my Canadian mailbox as we struggle with a recent diagnosis for our 12 year-old daughter who is autistic and nonverbal.
A recent consultation with Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto showed a curvature of 50°, and scoliosis of the apex of cervicothoracic junction of at least 25%.
Monitoring will be yearly and surgery and bracing have not been recommended.
I am concerned about progression and potential pain—I thought that treatment would avoid progression.
Our child communicates with an advanced speaking device and signs with some fluency, but with autism I'm concerned she can't convey entirely how she feels.
The leaning appears to be worsening, and I worry that treatment options being offered are limited.
I wondered if I could do more to investigate?
Bracing now may increase flexibility and may slow the progression.
Bracing in the light of autism can be difficult.
I would like to know if scoliosis, having a history of degenerative disease, and having neck fusion done at C5-C6 could cause fairly serious balance problems as well as feeling dizzy?
This has caused a lot of problems for me including driving a car at times.
I am also experiencing vision issues that they claim could be from a fall that I had when I was 12 years old.
Do you believe that the fall could have caused any of these issues regarding my spine?
Who would you recommend that I see as I feel my scoliosis is getting somewhat worse?
I also have a hard time walking a straight line and at times hold my head to the side.
Could this be scoliosis?
I am a 54-year-old female.
Could the mild scoliosis that I have be playing a part in the sciatic pain I am experiencing in my right buttock and leg?Sometimes that indeed can be the case.
Patients with mild scoliosis can have spinal stenosis, which can cause nerves to be pinched in the spine.
I am having a lot of sciatica pain and was told I have mild scoliosis.
Could this be part of my problem?
I was also told I have a slightly bulging disc.
Spinal stenosis and scoliosis can occur together as both are degenerative conditions in adults.
I'm 20 years old, with a 38°, well-balanced curve.
I often run into older people with scoliosis like mine.
What should I do to prepare as I age?
What do I do when I am 80 years old?
Will going to activities like water aerobics help?
Is there a good chance I'll be bedridden?
Do you know anything from dealing with elderly patients?Maintain aerobic fitness, good muscle strength, and bone health through vitamin D and calcium supplements.
38° curves usually do not progress when primarily thoracic in location.
Not from your curve!
I was told I had scoliosis as a child.
Now that I'm an adult, what other spine problems do I need to be concerned with?It is best to have x-rays done every few years to assess the degree of curvature progression.
Curves that are balanced and are not becoming greater in their degree of measurement can continue to be treated conservatively.
It is not uncommon for patients with adolescent scoliosis to have degenerative (arthritic) changes seen as an adult, but earlier in life than would be expected otherwise.
Having a firm understanding of the natural progression of one's own unique scoliosis condition as an adult is important in strategizing ways to compensate for problems that may arise and for surgical avoidance if possible.
My daughter was diagnosed late with scoliosis (at age 15 years), with a 23° curve.
What are her options for treatment?Curves under 25° to 30° generally are not treated.
She should be followed until skeletal maturity though.
She may be skeletally mature at this point.
I'm 20 years old.
I have a 38° curve.
I do yoga every morning and it reduces the pain a lot.
I want to do tai, kickboxing, aikido, and parkour.
Can I do these things?I’d say you can probably do those things, but you may be at increased risk for an exacerbation of back pain.
It is not likely to affect your scoliosis.
Basically, if you can do those activities comfortably, it is o.k. from my standpoint.
Is running barefoot okay with scoliosis?Fine.
I have about a 15° curve, and I am a female 60 years old.
I am able to manage my pain without medications.
I also see a chiropractor.
Is there anything else I can do to help my condition without medications or surgery?
I am also at a healthy weight.
Do you recommend chiropractors for helping with scoliosis pain?
With my spine twisted my chiropractor rotates my spine to straighten it and alleviates the pain.
Isn't that a good thing?I think you are doing most of what you need to do.
Being healthy and active is best.
Chiropractic treatments are optional, but of unproven benefit.
If they help then keep going.
Will any type of chiropracty or other physiotherapy help alleviate pain symptoms?Pain that is musculoskeletal in nature for patients should be treated with physical therapy modalities to help with core strengthening and increasing range of motion.
What kind of exercises can my 16.5-year-old daughter do to help alleviate her scoliosis?
She is about 23°, and was diagnosed too late for bracing.
Nothing will correct the curve.
23° curves are usually below the threshold for bracing.
She should do well with a 23° curve.
Exercise can improve flexibility and can help with muscle aches.
My daughter walks with a pronounced concave posture.
What exercises  can she do to help her posture and rotation?She should be assessed by a physical therapist.
I would like to download the correct exercises for adult scoliosis, in a diagram form, but can’t find them.
Groin pain can be seen in patients with pinched nerves in the upper lumber region.
I am 69 years old and was just diagnosed one year ago with scoliosis.
I am doing exercise only.
Is that enough to straighten the curves?Often exercises are all that are needed to address symptoms related to minor scoliosis curves.
What are some good exercises you would recommend?
Also, is there a best way to sleep?Core stabilization exercises are best.
Your doctor can refer you to a physical therapist who can teach you proper exercises.
There is no best way to sleep.
Do what works best for you.
I am 51 years old and have a heart condition, and also have had scoliosis my whole life.
Physical therapy (PT) does help my back feel better and it does straighten my back a little.
I am limited in walking and cannot swim.
I was told your outpatient centers may be able to help with physical therapy.
Do I need a physician's order or can I go them on my own?
Not sure how to start.
You will need an order in most states from a physician for P.T. I would start with your primary doctor.
What are the benefits of Mehta casting versus non-Mehta casting for early intervention of infant scoliosis?Mehta casting is successful in treating many infantile curves.
Other types of bracing and casting can be successful if they are demonstrating improvement of the curve by x-ray measurement while in the cast or brace.
Is traction a viable option for treatment of pain from degenerative arthritic scoliosis in the lower lumbar region of an 83-year-old woman?Traction is not very effective in treating arthritic symptoms related to scoliosis.
My 15-year-old son was just diagnosed with idiopathic scoliosis with a curvature of more than 25°.
Bracing is thought to keep a curve from progressing 85% of the time.
How many curves that would not have progressed anyway is not clear.
Most kids do well in braces, if they don't have to wear it to school and social functions.
Is there good evidence to suggest reasonable improvement in scoliosis with exercise, physical therapy, chiropractic, or other means of conservative care other than bracing?
At what degree of scoliosis should bracing be considered?
At what age is bracing no longer a feasible option?
What is/are the most effective means of correcting a scoliosis short of surgical intervention?There really isn't anything overwhelmingly positive.
Bracing should be considered at 25° to 30° curvature, up to 40° Age for bracing depends on physical maturity.
A rough guideline is 14 years old for a girl, and 16 years old for a boy.
Only surgery will correct scoliosis.
Most curves don't need surgery!
I have a daughter with 35° of curvature uncorrected, and about 15° corrected by a TLSO (thoraco-lumbo-sacral-orthosis) Boston Brace.
She is a 9-year-old Tanner II female.
Is vertebral body stapling a reasonable option?
Should we simply continue the TLSO bracing despite the indications that no juvenile idiopathic scoliosis patients avoid surgery?
I can send films—what do you recommend?
The Philadelphia Shriners Hospitals for Children is a leader in this new technique.
My daughter is a 9-year-old, Tanner II, with a 37° uncorrected curvature, and about 15°  corrected by TLSO Boston brace.
What do you folks think of growth rods, vertebral body stapling, brace, etc.?No, to growth rods at her age.
An evaluation at a major center that is facile with stapling would be an excellent option.
Our daughter is a prime candidate.
Yes, there are several centers, notably The Philadelphia Shriners Hospitals for Children that have published their early results.
Very few centers are doing this.
More will likely do so in the future.
Is surgery likely to be the only option for a 9-year-old with a 35° curve already?Not necessarily.
It should be treated with bracing at this time.
Quoting, "38° curves usually do not progress when primarily thoracic in location." is that true of juvenile as well as adolescent?No, I was referring to curve magnitude at skeletal maturity.
What minimally invasive procedures do you recommend for scoliosis?The types of minimally invasive procedures—anterior (front) stapling or rod and posterior percutaneous rods depend upon the age of the patient, type of curve, and its flexibility.
Many curves are not good candidates for a fully minimally invasive approach.
What are your viewpoints on getting corrective surgery?It depends upon the age of the patient and the type of problem that the patient presents with.
In the pediatric population (less than 21 years of age), the most common indication for surgery is deformity progression and cosmetic concerns surrounding scoliosis.
In the adult population with scoliosis, patients may present with pain as their primary complaint.
Surgery should be one's last option.
My 13 year old has been wearing a back brace for several years.
She has just gone into her third brace.
Her curve has progressed to 40°, and is now termed kyphoscoliosis.
We are having difficulty getting her to wear the new brace.
We have briefly discussed surgery, but she is still growing.
Her biggest fear about surgery is scarring.
How bad is this, and what recovery is expected if this route is recommended?Growth need not, nor necessarily should be, complete prior to surgery.
The scar is long, but most heal quite nicely.
Following surgery, the patient is in the hospital 6 to 7 days, and back to school in 4 to 6 weeks.
Full activity is attained in most cases at 6 months.
A 12-year-old female was diagnosed with idiopathic scoliosis at age 11 years as an  incidental finding status post-fall with arm fracture.
Per x-ray in October 2011, 47° angle of right thoracic with lumbar curve to the left was found.
Parents elect observation with physical therapy in lieu of brace.
During 7-month observation, the patient had onset of menarche with irregular cycle.
Second opinion recommends spinal fusion.
On June 14, 2012, 6 wks after diagnosis of greater than 65° degree angle, the patient now has visible shoulder asymmetry with pronounced hip deformity and back tenderness on palpation.
The patient is tall at approximately 5 ft, 9 inches height, The mother is 6 ft tall and the maternal grandfather is 6 ft, 2 inches.
No known history of scoliosis on the maternal side, but prevalent on the paternal, with the child's father requiring a brace as a teenager.
Per parents this child is “clumsy” with balance problems and frequent falls since a very young age.
Considering history of present illness, rapid progression of diagnosis, and personal and family history, is there a possible differential diagnosis for the type of scoliosis this child suffers from?I would agree with the recommendation for surgery.
Also, she needs a neurology consult and a screening MRI of the cervical, thoracic, and lumber spine to rule out any other underlying disorder or pathology.
Is a neurology consult and MRI to rule out underlying pathology common?It’s fairly common in my practice, but not necessarily routine.
I have read that Harrington rods have a high rate of displacement and revision.
For a 12-year-old girl with a greater-than-65° degree thoracic curve accompanied by an increasingly severe lumbar curve, is there a better fixation option?True.
Harrington rods are 20 years obsolete.
Newer technologies have resulted in a very low rate of displacement and need for revision surgery.
Our daughter is a patient of yours and has a greater than 70° curve.
How long until she will be at home?
What risks are there?
Is the full recovery time 6 months or a year?She would be in the hospital about a week.
She would need to be out of school about 4 to 6 weeks.
Usually, patients are back to full activity in 6 months.
Risks include infection, hardware failure, and neurologic injury, but all are very rare.
We are exceedingly attentive to all these issues before, during, and after surgery.
Prior to surgery, will the procedure be described to the patient and her parents and will they be given the opportunity to see what will be used on the patient?
How long post-surgery should we expect our daughter to be monitored?
Are there any concerns in adulthood after surgery if it is done at age 11 years?Parents and the patient can see the representative hardware if they are interested!
What kind of pain management is to be expected post-surgery?Epidural catheter and IV (intravenous) PCA (patient-controlled analgesia) are the standard modalities we employ.
If surgery is a final option, what is the recovery time?Weusually see the patient at 1, 3, and 6 months after surgery, and every other year for 5 years.
Adult concerns are minimal, but it depends on the levels of fusion.
I'm 54 years old with a severe S curvature.
A neurosurgeon I recently saw mentioned a new treatment to stabilize the spine utilizing cages.
Can you give me more detail?Sometimes cages (which are spacers) can be placed through side incisions either with a standard opening or with minimally invasive techniques.
It can assist with deformity correction and with bone healing, but is not required.
Unfortunately, these techniques require a separate back incision (usually lengthy) to place screws and rods and achieve final correction if needed.
When you have an adolescent who presents with scoliosis and back pain, how do you approach the treatment for the pain?A full examination will evaluate the source of pain.
Most commonly musculoskeletal and mechanical back pain is well managed with exercise, weight loss (if overweight), aerobic fitness, and/or NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs).
I am 71 yrs old.
Is it possible that I can get a brace that would be of any help to me at this late stage of my life?
Is surgery an option at all?Bracing can be done for scoliosis in children.
In adults it has no proven benefit, and in my opinion leads to weakened musculature around the spine.
What are the best exercises for older adult with 35° curve?Core stabilization exercises are best.
I have thoracolumbar 41° curve.
What concern is there for a ridge hump, and decreased lung and chest area for a person more than 60 years old?As curves get greater than 40° there is some increased chance of progression of deformity.
Your doctor should monitor your back with x-rays on a yearly basis.
Do you know of any work with stem cells in this area for the back pain?No, I do not.
What do you think of the CLEAR™ Institute protocol for scoliosis correction and reduction?I have had three patients do the protocol prior to surgery.
It has increased their flexibility.
I have not seen anything in peer-reviewed medical journals showing any actual improvement or reversal of curves.
My main problem is my lumbar at the belt level and nerve pain in my right hip.
I am a 52-year-old male with an S-curve in my back.
What is standard procedure on an adult my age with the two curves that combine together summing to a 54° curve in my back?
I had a second opinion from an orthopaedic doctor and he said," I could put the rods down your back, but you would lose all the spinal flexibility that you have now.”
One bigger problem is I am a lifelong Coumadin®  (warfarin) patient.
If so, how would I go about applying?
What can be done non-surgically for arthritis in the hip joint area, specifically in the groin area?
I recommend injections with cortisone or joint fluid (viscosupplement), although the viscosupplements are not FDA approved.
I do them in my practice with ultrasound guidance.
As always, weight loss, use of a cane, and physical therapy are most important!
Will insurance cover these treatments since they are not FDA approved?
Not usually, but most insurance companies have a method to seek prior authorization or appeal denials.
Are the viscosupplements the same as Synvisc®  used in knee joints?
Yes, there are 5 different brands available in the U.S. All have been proven to be effective.
