It is very safe method of contraception, inserted by a health care professional in the office and provides 5 years of hassle free contraception.
Additional benefits include very light menstrual cycles, decreased menstrual cramps and 99.9% pregnancy avoidance.
Regarding the new sterilization procedures, how do they work to prevent pregnancy?
Both sterilization procedures block the fallopian tubes.
The Essure®  procedure utilizes a metal coil with a matrix embedded that will block the fallopian tube.
Is it common for IUD removal to delay normally-regular cycles?
If so, are there an average number of cycles it takes to return to normal?
There are two types of IUD's currently available.
One is the copper IUD which usually when removed results in regular menstrual cycle.
The progesterone IUD may require 2-3 months before re-establishing normal menses.
However, again, if you are perimenopausal periods may skip.
Also you need to check for pregnancy if your IUD has been removed and your periods have not returned to normal.
Can you get a STD from oral sex?
For instance - if one person has a fever blister?
Or - if a person has an STD, is oral sex still okay?
Yes - STD's may be transmitted orally during oral/anal sex - including GC (gonorrhea), Chlamydia, Herpes and Hepatitis.
If there are blisters or ulcers or any lesions present, you should abstain from this activity.
Can you please talk about the safety of the HPV vaccine?
My daughter (who is 14) has gotten the first shot.
A coworker told me the she didn't want her daughter (who is 12) to have it because of safety reason.
I am now rethinking my decision.
The HPV vaccine represents one of the greatest bench to bedside breakthroughs for women.
Just think about it - we have eradicated Polio, chicken pox, measles, mumps and rubella infections all with a vaccine.
We now know that cervical cancer is caused by a HPV virus.
This vaccination helps prevent cervical cancer.
While there are minor aches, pains, redness in the inoculated area, major safety issues have not been raised.
Is there any relation between chronic cervicitis and HPV?
Chronic cervicitis is a non-specific finding on PAP smears.
If it coexists with a vaginitis (bacterial vaginosis, yeast, trich) then cervicitis may be noted.
However, if there are no vaginal complaints, the HPV virus is not present and there are no cervical lesions then we ignore these findings.
I have had a cone biopsy for dysplasia.
Would that be from HPV?
Most causes of dysplasia are due to the HPV virus.
It is only recently that we have been able to test for the presence of the HPV virus.
If you have had a cone biopsy (or LEEP procedure) then make sure that you get PAP smears regularly as well as HPV testing.
Is there value to testing for HPV in the absence of any clinical findings?
Yes - the current recommendation is to begin HPV testing at age 30 years when the traditional PAP is performed.
HPV is very common.
Approximately 50-70% of women will acquire an HPV infection during her lifetime.
For most women, the virus clears up.
My GYN doctor has mentioned I have some small fibroids but they are not clinically significant.
If they begin to grow or cause problems, what type of symptoms will they cause?
Fibroids are found in 50-80% of women.
Luckily, most women have no symptoms.
Most common symptoms can be change in menstrual bleeding (intensity, quantity & duration), cramps, infertility and cosmetic effects (markedly enlarged abdomen).
And urinary frequency, constipation and pelvic pain.
Coming off HRT treatment would this mean that my extremely bad symptoms would reappear?
My G.P. told me so, which is also a concern.
Pretty confused at to what to do next.
The current guidelines suggest that symptomatic women consider HRT.
The symptoms that are currently approved by the FDA for treatment include: vaginal dryness, pain with intercourse, hot flashes, night sweats and osteoporosis prevention.
Additionally, treatment with the least amount of hormones for the shortest period of time (5 yrs. or less) is advisable.
My husband says that I snore since I have entered menopause!
I have tried over the counter things & also sleeping on my stomach.
What is available through surgery & how successful is surgery?
It is probably coincidental to menopause.
Can a sudden onset of regular mid-cycle spotting (day 11 - 14) be an early sign of perimenopause?
If so, is 38 years old too early to experience it?
Perimenopause can begin in your mid-30's until the cessation of menses at age 51-58.
So that changes you described can be due to perimenopausal changes, but most likely based on the timing you discussed to be mid-cycle ovulation bleeding which is normal.
What to do when you are Perimenopausal--symptoms low sex drive?
Most importantly - what is the quality of your relationship with your sexual partner?
Declining estrogen levels associated with menopause can lead to decreased arousal.
The testosterone so vital to male libido is also present in women; the gradual decline in testosterone levels with age may affect female libido.
And vaginal dryness — common in post-menopausal women — can make intercourse painful.
What is sexual dysfunction in women?
Is it age related?
One definition of sexual dysfunction is any aspect of your sexual function that causes you concern and distress.
Sexual dysfunction can happen at any age.
The causes are likely to be different at different ages.
What causes sexual dysfunction?
Many things can cause problems in your sex life.
Certain medicines (such as oral contraceptives, high blood pressure medications, and chemotherapy drugs), diseases (such as diabetes or high blood pressure), excessive alcohol use or vaginal infections can cause sexual problems.
Depression and, unfortunately, some antidepressant medications can cause sexual problems.
In my early 50s, sex still okay, but takes a lot more work and a lot more time to get there.
Does it keep getting worse the older we get?
It is common for both men and women to experience slower sexual response with aging.
Fantasies and adding variety to the sex repertoire (different positions, sex toys, vibrators) can be helpful.
Some people take advantage of slowing down to enjoy the intimacy even more.
Are there signs and symptoms of sexual dysfunction in women?
The signs and symptoms are generally feelings by the person that their sex life is not normal or the way they want it to be.
Feelings could be anything from painful intercourse to no interest in sex.
Lately I have vaginal dryness (I am 42).
I use a lubricant, but intercourse is not as satisfying.
What else can I do besides using the lubricant?
Unfortunately, more information is needed regarding satisfaction.
How is female sexual dysfunction diagnosed?
The doctor likely will begin with a thorough history of the problem and your symptoms and then a physical exam.
The doctor may perform a pelvic examination to evaluate the health of the reproductive organs and a Pap test (if you are due for one) to detect changes in the cells of the cervix (to check for cancer or a pre-cancerous condition).
He or she may order other diagnostic tests to rule out any medical problems that may be contributing to the dysfunction.
Is a uterine prolapse common in women over 50 and does this affect sexual function.
Uterine prolapse is very common.
It has no effect on sexual function, unless the woman feels embarrassed by it.
The uterus can always be gently pushed further up and out of the way.
After my third child, I have lost all sexual desire.
I still have sex with my husband, but I do not enjoy it.
I never initiate it and my husband is becoming more and more bothered by it.
Is this a result of childbirth?
What can I do about it?
To be honest, I miss ‘enjoying’ the intimacy with my husband.
It is common for women to have some decreased desire during pregnancy, immediately postpartum and sometimes with breastfeeding, but desire generally returns to normal with time.
If it persists, other causes should be considered.
If you pretty much lost your sexual desire in your 30’s and 40’s – how can it improve after menopause?
Is there any hope?
That really depends on the reason for the loss of interest.
For example, causes may be situational or relationship related.
If the situation or relationship improves, sexual desire would likely improve.
I cannot take estrogen for menopause because I had an estrogen related cancer and hysterectomy.
Besides lubricants for dryness, what can I take to increase sexual desire?
Currently there are no approved medications for sexual desire.
Making sure that intercourse is comfortable with lubricants and moisturizers (there is a difference between the two) is a first step.
Try to assess what is keeping you from being interested.
Stress, fatigue, issues in the relationship, sexual boredom can all be factors.
It has been proven that reading erotic material a couple times a week can increase woman's interest in sex.
Sometimes a testosterone level can be checked, but results do not always correlate with level of desire.
Can taking birth control pills for a long time cause a loss in sexual desire?
Oral contraceptives have been known to decrease desire.
However, it is always important to know if desire is decreased for some other reason before discontinuing a reliable form of contraception.
What can increase my sexual arousal?
One of the symptoms of decreased sexual arousal in women, is a reduced amount of vaginal lubrication.
Over-the-counter vaginal lubricants can augment lubrication.
Iget sexually aroused and foreplay is satisfying.
However, ‘penetration’ is not satisfying and can be painful.
What could be wrong with me?
There are several vulvar conditions that contribute to painful intercourse.
This requires an examination to know which syndrome a woman has.
Iam in my early 20’s and sex embarrasses me.
I get aroused, but as things progress, I feel more and more uncomfortable and am unable to continue.
How can I overcome this?
I recommend discussing this with a physician or clinician with whom you are comfortable.
Try thinking back to the past about any memories or things that were said to you that might make you feel this way.
If your clinician is not able to help you, ask for a referral to a sex therapist or search for one on the web as described above.
It is worth your time and effort so that you can enjoy your relationship.
Ican orgasm through masturbation and with my husband (pardon my being blunt) with his hands or tongue, but never during intercourse.
What can I do to change this?
The majority of women have an orgasm more easily with direct stimulation to the clitoris.
There are many women who do not have a so-called 'vaginal orgasm'.
That being said, in some positions women can arrange to have direct stimulation to the clitoris while the penis is in the vagina, and others find increased stimulation having intercourse with the man behind the woman.
Women should not feel as though they need to strive for a vaginal organism It is perfectly normal to reach orgasm other ways.
I have pain during sex.
What is this caused from?
Painful intercourse can be caused by a number of problems, including endometriosis, a pelvic mass, ovarian cysts, vaginitis, vaginal dryness, the presence of scar tissue from surgery, or a sexually transmitted disease.
Hypersensitivity around the entrance to the vagina is a common problem that does not necessarily improve with lubrication.
How do hormones affect female sexual function at menopause?
Hormones play an important role in sexual function in women.
With the decrease in the female hormone estrogen that is related to aging and menopause, many women experience some changes in sexual function as they age, including decreased vaginal lubrication and sometimes decreased genital sensation.
Will menopause decrease my sexual activity?
Menopause does not have to decrease your sex life at all.
It all depends on how you are feeling and what you are thinking.
If you are experiencing a lot of stress, anxiety and moodiness, you may not feel very sexy.
Emotional changes that often accompany menopause can add to a woman's loss of interest in sex and/or ability to become aroused.
Treatments used for PMS can be helpful in these circumstances, and hormone therapy (HT) can also be helpful - especially when hot flashes are bothersome.
Hormone therapy and vaginal lubricants may also improve certain conditions, such as loss of vaginal lubrication that is common at menopause.
If I decide to take HT – will this take care of the side effects of menopause including decreased desire?
Estrogen is not considered a hormone of desire.
If lack of interest in sex is due to discomfort or dryness with intercourse, estrogen could improve comfort with intercourse and indirectly increase desire.
Is sexual desire harder after you have had a total hysterectomy with ovaries removed and everything?
Is it only related to decreased hormones or other things?
Desire is mostly related to other things besides hormones.
Most women do not have difficulty with desire after a hysterectomy with ovaries removed, other than the fact that it will put pre-menopausal women into instant menopause, and they will have to deal with those symptoms.
It may require a psychological adjustment if the woman is particularly young and not expecting to be in menopause at that age.
With my hysterectomy, my doctor referred to an area called the vaginal vault and that it was shortened when the roof of the vagina was closed.
How is this going to affect intercourse with my husband?
Will he not be able to penetrate or what?
Whether your husband can penetrate will depend on how long the vagina currently is.
Your physician should tell you when it is all right to have intercourse and penetration should be approached gently until you determine you are comfortable.
If your husband is not able to penetrate completely the vagina may be considerably shorter.
You or your husband may be able to determine the length with your fingers.
If it is short, check with your clinician about the possibility of gentle stretching with a soft dilator after it is completely healed.
If a woman has a hysterectomy in her 20’s or 30’s – does this have the same effect as if the woman is in her 50’s?
Will sexual desire come back easier?
If only the uterus is removed, it should have no effect on desire.
If the ovaries are removed, the younger woman has to deal with a very early menopause which requires a psychological adjustment.
Sexual desire is related more to relationships than it is to hormones.
Can I take medication to help?
Taking medication is usually not necessary.
The important thing is to sort out why you are not pleased with your sex life.
As mentioned above, there are many possible causes.
Is there a ‘Viagra’ for women?
There is no Viagra for women.
Mental arousal and genital arousal is not the same thing.
Women can feel mentally and emotionally aroused without genital arousal, so the two do not correlate well.
Viagra is not a treatment for low desire.
I am a relatively healthy, post-menopausal 55 YO woman who has had bilateral knee replacement and several revision surgeries in the last 2 years.
Because of pain, I take narcotic medication daily.
Can these narcotics and anti-inflammatory medication affect sex drive/interest?
Yes - pain medications have been reported to decrease libido.
However, chronic pain can also decrease libido.
It is a challenging situation.
My wife is on Prozac and has an almost nonexistent libido.
How do you know if this is due to the depression or the drug?
What can we do?
Both depression and anti-depressants are known to decrease sexual function.
Some people try switching to another anti-depressant to see if it helps.
There are reports that Wellbutrin has fewer sexual side effects.
What is involved with pelvic floor rehab?
Does it help with painful intercourse?
Is it just for post hysterectomy?
Pelvic floor rehab is an exciting, relatively new field.
It is used for a variety of conditions and has been particularly helpful for situations involving pelvic pain and painful intercourse.
I hope this information has been helpful.
My husband and I have been trying to get pregnant for well over a year.
I am concerned that we may have a problem.
What is our next step?
Difficulty conceiving a child is not uncommon.
There are millions of couples each year that are unable to become pregnant without medical assistance.
At this point, couples may benefit from an infertility evaluation.
The HSG is performed in the X-ray department by injecting X-ray dye through the cervix while observing on a TV monitor.
Additional tests may be recommended by fertility specialists based on the individual patients’ history, physical examination and the results of previous testing.
These may include additional blood work, ultrasound of the uterus and ovaries or laparoscopy.
When should a couple be evaluated for infertility?
When a couple has failed to conceive after one year of trying, they should be evaluated.
Because female age plays an important role in women fertility, women who are older than 35 should seek care after 6 months of failed to conceive.
Women who have irregular period, PCOS, endometriosis or pelvic adhesion should seek care immediately.
Women who suspected tubal or pelvic factor (for example-women with history of sexually transmitted diseases, pelvic inflammatory disease or ruptured appendicitis) should also seek care immediately.
Couple who suspected male factor infertility (for example-history of surgery at genital area or have received chemotherapy in the past) should also seek care immediately.
Is infertility a woman’s problem?
When talking about infertility, many people think that it is only female problems.
In fact, only about one-third of cases are infertility due to the woman (female factors).
In another one third of cases, infertility is due to the man (male factors).
The remaining cases are caused by a mixture of male and female factors or by unknown factors.
Thus, both partners should be evaluated at the same time.
Since I have asthma, can I have baby?
Yes, there are many individuals that have asthma and are able to get pregnant.
Your asthma should be well controlled prior to pregnancy.
Discuss this with your physician.
If we have been trying for 8 months to become pregnant, is it wise to see a fertility specialist at this time?
We have been using OTC ovulation tests and taking temperatures for 5 months.
Does insurance cover initial consultations/education?
If you are less than 35 years of age, it is not necessary to consult a specialist for one year.
You can discuss this with your OB/GYN.
If you are older than 35 yrs., this would be the time to discuss with a specialist.
If there are any medical issues that might cause infertility or possible male infertility issues, definitely see a specialist earlier than later.
In terms of insurance coverage, you would need to check with your insurance company as coverage varies.
I started menstruating when I was 9, will that have any effect on eggs, ovulation and pregnancy?
The time that menstruation begins does not affect ovulation or pregnancy.
Whether you start your period early or later does not correlate to infertility.
On another note, the timing of menopause is not directly affected by the beginning of menses.
The most common causes of female infertility include fallopian tube damage or blockage, endometriosis, ovulation disorders, elevated prolactin, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), early menopause, benign uterine fibroids and pelvic adhesions.
The most common causes of male infertility include abnormal sperm production or function, impaired delivery of sperm and overexposure to certain environmental elements.
General health and lifestyle issues can be the causes of infertility in both men and women.
A new ANDROLOGY lab will open at the Richard E Jacob Avon Family Health Center to assess sperm for our male infertility patients.
What is luteal phase defect?
Does vitamin B-6 help to resolve it?
Luteal phase is the phase from ovulation to the time menstruation begins.
During that phase, your body is making a hormone called progesterone.
This hormone is secreted in order for the uterus to prepare for pregnancy.
Women with luteal phase defect have problems with making the hormone progesterone.
Yet it is now believed that the real problem is stemming from ovulation issues and not hormonal issues during the luteal phase alone.
Currently we would look at your ovulation history and if you have any problem with ovulation, then fertility drugs would be the treatment of choice.
Is overstimulation of the ovaries still a concern with fertility drugs?
I experienced it over ten years ago and therefore have not tried IVF since.
Yes overstimulation of the ovaries is still a concern.
To prevent the overstimulation (also called ovarian hyperstimulation), the patient is monitored very closely while taking certain fertility drugs to prevent overstimulation.
Currently the way the ovaries are stimulated with medications is improving than it was ten years ago.
A younger patient can experience overstimulation due to amount of eggs.
Now that you are older, there would be less chance of overstimulation.
Again - discuss this with an infertility specialist.
Do antibiotics lower sperm counts or motility?
Antibiotics most likely will not permanently lower sperm count or motility.
Illnesses that antibiotics may be prescribed for may alter the sperm count or motility for a short period of time.
The sperm count will usually return to normal after the illness is gone.
Can several years of birth control use (8-10 years) lead to infertility?
Birth control pills (BCP’s) do not lead to infertility.
Ovulation issues are not apparent when an individual is on birth control pills.
Some women taking BCP's because they are having problems with their menstrual cycles may actually be having ovulation problems to begin with.
Bottom line, BCP's do not lead to infertility.
Infertility is present due to other reasons.
Is Depo Provera a bad birth control choice if one wants to become pregnant later in life?
I heard it was very hard to get pregnant after using it.
Once you stop taking Depo Provera it might take up to 6 months for ovulation to resume.
That may be the reason why some feel that taking the drug makes getting pregnant harder.
It is actually that you may not be ovulating.
This is different for every person.
In order to get pregnant, you have to ovulate.
Once the medication is gone from your system you should not have a problem with conceiving.
How does the Doctor determine what type of treatment to use?
Specific treatment(s) for infertility will be determined by your physician based on your age, overall health, and medical history, extent of the disorder, cause of the disorder, your tolerance for specific medications, procedures, or therapies, expectations for the course of the disorder, and most importantly-your opinion or preference.
Once a diagnosis is made, the specialist can work with you to determine the course of treatment.
According to the American Society of Reproductive Medicine (ASRM), most infertility cases (85 to 90 percent) are treated with conventional therapies, such as drug treatment or surgical repair of reproductive abnormalities.
Depending on the cause of infertility, there are many options to offer an infertile couple.
What are the treatment options for infertility?
Infertility can be treated with medications, surgery, artificial insemination, or assisted reproductive technology.
Many times these treatments are combined.
In most cases infertility is treated with medications or surgery.
Various fertility medicines are often used to treat women with ovulation problems.
Doctors also use surgery (such as laparoscopy) to treat some causes of infertility.
Many problems with a woman's ovaries, fallopian tubes, or uterus can sometimes be corrected with surgery.
Intrauterine insemination (IUI) is another type of treatment for infertility.
IUI is also called known by most people as artificial insemination.
In this procedure, a very small catheter is inserted through the cervix (the opening of the uterus) and specially prepared sperm is injected directly into the woman’s uterus.
It is an out patient procedure (just like having a Pap test).
Sometimes the woman is also treated with medicines that stimulate eggs production before IUI.
IUI is often used to treat mild to moderate male factor infertility, women who have problems with their cervical mucus or couples with unexplained infertility.
Assisted reproductive technology, such as in vitro fertilization, is indicated in couple with severe male factor, tubal/pelvic factor infertility that could not be corrected with surgery or in couple that failed to conceive with other option that less invasive.
My Doctor has recommended laparoscopy.
What can I expect?
Laparoscopy is an outpatient procedure which involves placing a thin camera (scope) through the navel to diagnose and treat conditions such as endometriosis, pelvic adhesions (scar tissue), fibroid tumors and tubal disease.
Laparoscopy often allows the surgeon to make their diagnosis and to determine if the tubes are open, if scarring is present, or if there are uterine abnormalities.
Many patients have had a previous laparoscopy(s).
The reproductive surgeon is highly trained in infertility treatment and advanced laparoscopic surgery.
I have been diagnosed with scar tissue in one of my fallopian tubes.
Should I continue trying to get pregnant or have surgery to remove the scar tissue?
Assuming that the other fallopian tube is normal, you should be able to get pregnant.
However, if you have been trying for more than a year, you should discuss with your doctor to see if there is a possibility to remove the scar tissue and also to determine if there is any other scarring in the pelvic area.
In vitro fertilization would be your best option if it turns out that both of your fallopian tubes were scarred, or if you failed to conceive with other options.
Are there fertility related medicines available that I can take?
Yes, there are oral medications to restore regular menstrual cycles such as clomiphene citrate (clomid or Serophene) or letrozole (Femara), which work by causing the pituitary gland to secrete more FSH.
The higher level of FSH stimulates the development of ovarian follicles that contain eggs and helping the ovaries release a monthly egg.
This drug is considered safe, is fairly inexpensive, and carries less risk of multiple births than other drugs.
Women who have polycystic ovary syndrome or menstruate irregularly apparently benefit most from this drug.
Sixty percent of women on clomiphene citrate successfully ovulate, and about 30 percent of women become pregnant in the first three months of being on the drug.
Side effects may include nausea, insomnia, breast tenderness and headaches.
There are also injectable fertility drugs to stimulate several eggs to ovulate, which include Repronex, Gonal F, Follistim, Bravelle and Menopure, which is very effective in inducing ovulation when oral agents do not work.
It can also enhance fertility by causing multiple eggs to ovulate during the cycle.
(Normally, only one egg is released each month.)
This therapy may also be offered for unexplained infertility or when other factors have been corrected but pregnancy has not occurred.
It is given as a daily injection, like an insulin shot, for approximately 1-2 weeks.
During this time, the patient is monitored with blood tests and ultrasound to optimize timing and reduce the risk of multiple pregnancies and to prevent over stimulating the ovaries.
After fertility drugs, what is done after multiple eggs are detected?
If you are referring to IVF, when multiple eggs are retrieved and fertilized.
A, a certain number of the embryos would then be transferred back to the uterus for hopeful implantation.
The remaining embryos are then frozen.
Tell me about In Vitro Fertilization?
IVF is the most common assisted reproductive technology method and is the treatment of choice for couples if both fallopian tubes are blocked, or for severe male factor infertility as well as for all other causes, including unexplained infertility, when conventional treatment has not been successful.
During the IVF process, the ovaries are stimulated with injectable fertility medications to mature multiple eggs.
Once monitoring with ultrasound and blood tests indicate that the eggs are ready, they are collected surgically with an ultrasound-guided needle under deep sedation.
The egg collection procedure takes about 20 minutes and is painless.
Fertilization is accomplished by exposing the eggs to sperm in a culture dish, or by directly injecting a single sperm into each mature egg (intracytoplasmic sperm injection - ICSI).
After fertilization, embryo development is monitored over the next 3-5 days at which time usually 2 to 3 embryos are placed into the uterus with a small catheter through the cervix.
Excess embryos may be frozen for future use.
I worry so much about the cost of In Vitro Fertilization, what is the success rate?
In the early years of IVF, success rates were very low.
Over the years the success rates for IVF have increased greatly.
In-Vitro Fertilization is safe, time-proven assisted reproductive treatment with a very high success rate.
The woman’s age is the strongest predictor of success.
How long should you wait to implant frozen embryo's?
Is there such a thing as waiting too long?
I know sperm can be frozen for a very long time, but what about fertilized eggs?
This depends on the length of time that the embryos have been frozen.
Our current technology for freezing embryos is more advanced compared to 5 or 10 years ago.
It is best to discuss with your fertility specialist to determine the viability.
Does the size of the cervix opening determine the positive outcome in receiving the sperm?
The size of the cervix has no impact on the ability to conceive.
However, some cervical procedures such as cone biopsies, may cause scarring and problem with receiving the sperm.
Can infertility treatments or IVF help someone who is prone to miscarriages?
Miscarriages occur due to many reasons.
Talk to your physician to see if they can determine the cause and if IVF would help.
What women can do to prevent infertility?
There are many things you can do to before seeing a doctor for infertility.
Healthy diets, regular exercise, maintain normal weight and healthy lifestyle would help improve your overall help and might help with your fertility.
You should stop smoking cigarette, stop drinking alcohol, and cut down caffeine intake before trying to conceive.
If you have any medical conditions, you should talk to your physician and make sure that they are under controlled before you are trying to conceive.
Women should start prenatal vitamin with folic acid at least 3 months before trying to conceive.
Lastly, since stress plays an important role in female reproduction, reduce stress level might improve your fertility.
Can Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS) be overcome with fertility drugs?
Women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) have difficulty with ovulation.
Although the fertility drugs do not treat the syndrome, it can overcome the problem of ovulation.
The chance of conception should be very good if the problem with ovulation is the only problem that you have.
Up to one third of couple with infertility problems both have issues with fertility.
Talk to your physician about fertility testing for both of you.
Does extremely painful cramping during menstruation signal the possibility of infertility?
Dysmenorrhea or painful cramps during menstruation can be caused from a variety of reasons.
Some conditions that can cause painful cramping, for example, endometriosis, can be a cause of infertility.
Yet many women with endometriosis have no problem trying to conceive.
Speak with your physician to determine why you are having painful cramps.
Take advantage of this chat to speak to a pediatric scoliosis specialist, David Gurd, MD, and an adult scoliosis specialist, Richard Schlenk, MD.
How accurate is the saliva test to determine the prognosis for progression of the curve?
Is it covered by insurance?
The saliva test is a relatively new test.
It has been quite good at helping to find curves that are very likely to progress.
With this being said, about 75 percent of people are still within the indeterminate grouping, meaning that these are unlikely to progress, but still could.
Most commonly, it is covered by the insurance company, but I would recommend asking the insurance company prior to the test.
Our 32-year-old daughter was diagnosed with scoliosis in her teens.
As an adult, she is experiencing lower back pain and numbness in both legs, and was told the trouble is within the nerve root beds at the base of the spine.
Since hyperparathyroidism runs in our family, other than monitoring her calcium/PTH & D, is there any other way to determine if her present difficulties are related to HPT?
Often, adolescent scoliosis can be progressive when someone reaches adulthood, and it results in increasing back pain and neurological symptoms.
It is not uncommon that patients with adolescent scoliosis develop degenerative scoliosis, which can result in encroachment upon the nerves in the lower part of the back.
We try aggressively to manage the symptoms with conservative medical treatment and to avoid surgery unless we fail to make any improvement.
I have scoliosis and need a knee replacement.
I have limped for years because of this and am concerned that when it is replaced, it will cause problems with my spine because of the scoliosis.
I do not think there is anything to worry about in regard to worsening of your spine condition with knee replacement.
Conversely, if the pattern of ambulation is altered secondary to knee arthritis, this can cause lower back issues.
Do you recommend an MRI be done to rule out any other issues with an infant with infantile scoliosis?
We asked for an MRI prior to the first cast, but we were told it was not necessary.
Should I pursue a second opinion to get an MRI done to make sure that infant, a 1 year old, has only infantile scoliosis and nothing else?
An MRI will likely be helpful at some point.
If there is any neurological concern at present, then I would push for an MRI sooner rather than later.
If the neurological exam is normal, then an MRI may be done later in life.
Is weakness in the right leg a symptom of adult scoliosis?
Weakness in the extremities can be a symptom of degenerative scoliosis as a secondary result from spinal stenosis.
However, a very small percentage of patients who present with leg weakness as an isolated finding have scoliosis as the cause of their symptoms.
An MRI, CT scan, or plain X-rays could be helpful in assisting with pinpointing if there is a spinal cause for this problem.
My 8-year-old son has left hemiplegia.
He was diagnosed with scoliosis last year.
The physician’s assistant said there would not be much we could do because it is caused by the weakness on his left side due to the brain damage.
I want to be practical, and the only suggestion she had was to keep him active, maybe martial arts.
Are there more things we should be doing?
An 8-year-old with hemiplegia does have a risk for progression of a curve.
The benefit of martial arts is that it can help with trunk strengthening that can help stabilize the curve.
If the curve is progressing, brace treatment may also be warranted.
I had scoliosis as a child and had a Harrington rod placed in the lower spine at age 14.
What is the likelihood that my daughter will develop scoliosis?
At what age should I have her evaluated?
Multiple genes are involved with the transmission of scoliosis to family members.
We do not fully understand all of the genetics to date.
