I have eye pain, but my eyes were checked out and found to be fine.
I also get what feels like hot flashes that come and go.
Can this be attributed to sarcoidosis?
Yes, this can happen with sarcoidosis.
If an ophthalmologist evaluated you and told you your eyes are fine, than the eye pain is probably not from sarcoidosis.
However, the hot flashes could be, but before we say that for sure, you need to talk to your physician to rule out other, more common causes.
Every spring in March, my sarcoidosis begins to affect me.
My ace level goes up, I have fatigue and irritability, and my lungs are affected by granulomas, unless my prednisone dose is increased.
I get by with low doses of prednisone 5 mg/day late October to early March, but I have to increase the prednisone dose to 10 mg per day or more in late March through June to get me through.
It’s like my body is responding to the allergy season.
Is there any way to break this cycle?
I have had sarcoidosis since 2008.
If you have had sarcoidosis since 2008, then it is probably a chronic condition by now.
We need to find ways to control your symptoms without many side effects.
One possibility would be to try what we call "steroid-sparing agents," such as methotrexate, to try to decrease the amount of prednisone you need every year.
How do you know if you have sarcoidosis if hot flashes and night sweats could be from perimenopause or sarcoidosis?
That can be a challenge.
One way to make the determination would be to see if those symptoms improve on sarcoidosis treatment.
If not and suspicion remains, then an evaluation for small fiber neuropathy may be warranted.
I discovered my sarcoidosis with erythema nodosum on my legs, then some granulomas in my lungs, but that’s been rather quiet.
The sarcoidosis has manifested itself primarily in my eyes with uveitis and glaucoma.
I take 7.5 mg methotrexate weekly to keep the inflammation in check.
I developed glaucoma requiring a tube in my right eye, and I use drops to maintain lower pressure.
A month ago, the erythema flared all of a sudden and my eyes were totally quiet for a month, but then I developed inflammation on nodules in my lungs and Heerfordt’s syndrome on my face.
I took extra methotrexate and my legs/lungs quieted down quickly, but the uveitis then reappeared in my eyes with a vengeance.
The pressure went up from 13 to 53 in ten days.
Have you seen the inflammation change locations like this before?
The inflammation caused by sarcoidosis can change locations.
It is not what usually happens, but it is possible.
Can numbness or a thick feeling in the balls of your feet be related to small fiber neuropathy?
Is hypersensitivity to light and smells related to my sarcoidosis?
That would be an unusual manifestation but, technically, in sarcoidosis anything is possible.
I shattered my right humerus July 7, 2014.
Three months later, I noticed a "lump" in my left upper arm.
The lump was surgically removed.
The surgeon said not to worry about it.
My pulmonologist said I needed a cardiologist to manage my care.
The cardiologist said the pulmonologist should manage my care.
I have had a granuloma in my lung for several years.
A granuloma was noted on my liver approximately five years ago.
I have been on Flovent inhalers for many years and periodically on steroids for respiratory flare-ups.
We believe you should see a physician with experience in managing sarcoidosis.
Most of the time, it is a lung doctor, but not all of them are comfortable with every aspect of sarcoidosis.
Rheumatologists frequently manage patients with sarcoidosis as well.
Once you find a doctor comfortable with sarcoidosis, he or she should be the one coordinating your care in regard to your disease.
Do I need a referral and where do I start?
I am a 47-year-old white female.
My family has a history of sarcoidosis.
A total of six family members have it.
I am currently having the following symptoms: fatigue, memory/word loss, bilateral feet neuropathy, headaches (occipital in nature), itching on my forearms only, low back pain, joint pain, dizzy spells and disturbances to my sleep.
My MRI shows about 10 lesions that are non-specific, possibly demyelinating areas with one that is faint off of Dawson’s finger; however, after one year, there have been no changes.
It is possible that this could be neurosarcoidosis?
Yes, it is possible that this is neurosarcoidosis.
However, before we reach that conclusion, it is important you see a neurologist familiar with sarcoidosis.
In the past year, I have had three nodules in my thyroid, the largest was 5mm.
Could this be related to sarcoidosis?
Sarcoidosis causing nodules in the thyroid gland is rare, but possible.
Why does sarcoidosis effect joints?
We do not know why.
Sarcoidosis can affect nearly any part of the body, which is why the inflammation or pain only occurs in some people's joints and not others.
The reason is not known.
Is muscle pain often seen in sarcoidosis patients?
It is not commonly seen, but certainly can be a manifestation in some people.
I had an MRI that mentioned small ischemic vessel disease.
Should I be concerned because my neurologist thinks this is something put on most reports.
That is not something that would be related to sarcoidosis.
That is reported in many scans and can be related to age or vascular disease, although a neurologist can give you a more specific explanation regarding that report description.
What does it mean if your ACE level is 16?
ACE levels are not terribly helpful in sarcoidosis.
ACE is an enzyme the body makes that is elevated in some people with sarcoidosis but is also normal in many people with sarcoidosis.
It is not a diagnostic test and is of little utility in my opinion.
The level of 16 is normal.
I haven't heard much about sarcoidosis in the last year.
I am very much interested in anything new.
I have the disorder in my left eye and had it in my lungs.
It’s nice to hear your lung sarcoidosis is better.
The options for sarcoidosis in your eyes depend on the specific type of inflammation you have there.
For example, if it is only on the front of your eye, eye drops alone should be fine.
If it is on the back of your eye, you may need more medication to control it.
My chest X-ray came back clear, and I have been diagnosed with sarcoidosis.
Is a chest X-ray pretty reliable?
Chest x-rays do have utility in sarcoidosis, but I think it is hard to diagnose sarcoidosis with an x-ray alone.
You would generally need a CT scan of the chest and then a biopsy that would be consistent with sarcoidosis.
If the x-ray alone is suspicious for sarcoidosis, and you have no symptoms and just signs of larger lymph nodes, then you can be presumed to have sarcoidosis, which can just be monitored a few times a year for symptoms and x-ray changes.
Can you have a flare up of sarcoidosis in any organ or part of the body and still have a normal ACE level?
I'm currently being treated with methotrexate 2.5mg x 7 and folic acid 1mg for nail sarcoidosis.
I'm being treated for nail sarcoidosis currently, and this has been an issue for six months now.
I'm losing my nails; they're all turning dark and brittle and very painful.
It would be nice if you had a way I could upload a picture of my fingernails.
You can have a flare of sarcoidosis and still have a normal ACE level.
The ACE test, as most of the tests, is not perfect.
Other diseases can have similar presentations as sarcoidosis.
No nail finding is specific for sarcoidosis.
How do you determine the stage of our condition, e.g., Stage II versus Stage III?
Sarcoidosis staging is very different than that of cancer staging.
The staging refers to sarcoidosis of the lungs only.
A Stage II chest x-ray shows some enlarged chest lymph nodes and some changes in the lung tissue, while Stage III only shows lung changes.
Does sarcoidosis have an effect on your SED rate and CRP?
Sarcoidosis can potentially cause some elevations in these variables.
These labs are not terribly helpful, though, because they are non-specific markers of inflammation.
We generally do not follow them in sarcoidosis.
What is the best test for neurosarcoidosis?
Neurosarcoidosis can present in many different forms.
Depending on the specific form, different tests are indicated.
Some examples of those tests are MRI of the brain, MRI of the spinal cord and lumbar puncture.
However, not every patient needs all of those tests.
I was prescribed Vitamin D, and I also take methotrexate by injection.
Why should I not take Vitamin D while on methotrexate?
In general, you should not take Vitamin D if you have sarcoidosis because your sarcoidosis can cause an increased level of active Vitamin D in your body.
If you take extra Vitamin D, you can end up with too much Vitamin D and calcium in your system.
It is not related to the methotrexate, but to the sarcoidosis itself.
My immunologist has me on a Vitamin D supplement.
I expressed concern because I've had hypercalcemia in the past with seizures.
My level was 8, and she assured me they would monitor it.
I'm to take it for three months, once a month.
In general, we avoid Vitamin D supplementation in sarcoidosis, especially if you had hypercalcemia.
One option is to check the active form of Vitamin D (1,25 Vitamin D).
If that one is low, then it’s probably OK to take the Vitamin D supplementation.
I saw where you mentioned not to take Vitamin D when on methotrexate treatment.
I am currently not taking any medications for sarcoidosis.
Is it OK to take Vitamin D?
If your sarcoidosis is inactive or resolved, and you don't show high levels of active Vitamin D (1,25 vitamin D) in your blood work, it is OK to take it.
Are probiotics, Vitamin D, calcium or magnesium contraindicated with sarcoidosis?
That would depend on whether the sarcoidosis was active and if elevated calcium is part of the sarcoidosis manifestations.
Generally, if sarcoidosis is active, Vitamin D and calcium are not recommended.
Your levels would be followed periodically.
In stable disease that is not being treated or not active, you can supplement if your levels are found to be low.
Can sunscreen help avoid Vitamin D absorption while out in the sun?
It could, but there is no recommendation to do that in sarcoidosis.
Vitamin D is important for your body.
The only thing we recommend in sarcoidosis is to avoid extra Vitamin D supplementation.
Have stem cell transplants had any success for pulmonary sarcoidosis?
There are case reports of stem cell transplantation being helpful in sarcoidosis, but mainly in patients with types of cancers that require the stem cell transplant, not performed due to sarcoidosis.
My retina specialist suggested ACTHAR as an alternative to prednisone, and said it would have fewer less side effects.
What is your take on this alternative?
ACTHAR-Gel is an option for the treatment for sarcoidosis, approved by the FDA.
It probably has fewer side effects than prednisone.
I have heard that sarcoidosis is now classified as an inflammatory disease versus an autoimmune disorder and that there are some similarities being found between proteins found in TB and sarcoid.
Therefore, there is some suggestion that more of an antibiotic treatment strategy versus immunosuppressant therapy is the way to go.
Is it still too new?
So far, there’s been no evidence we should start using it clinically in our patients.
Is there any scientific progress in the treatment or even cure of sarcoidosis?
Does CRISPR have hope to resolve some of the symptoms or develop a cure?
It is too early to know how CRISPR will play a role in sarcoidosis.
Immune suppression can cure sarcoidosis in many.
It is the one-third of patients who do not respond to immune suppression or need to be suppressed for a long time that can be a challenge.
IV infliximab has been shown to be beneficial in some of those patients, but right now there is not much else that has shown to be promising.
While the doctor is in there, he will be putting a screw in the two lower bones of my spine to hold them together because they are moving and there is no cartilage left in between the bones.
I've stopped taking my steroids weeks before the surgery.
He doesn't want me starting my steroids for 12 weeks after the surgery.
If I start before, he says the steroid will weaken my bones and the screw will not hold.
Do you have any advice on how to not lose the cartilage between your bones?
Cartilage loss is the hallmark of osteoarthritis.
The main contributors to losing cartilage include some underlying genetics, overload, improper mechanics and injury.
Unfortunately, we do not know who will and will not develop osteoarthritis.
However, obesity, improper form during work and exercise, and overload all can lead to degeneration and overuse of cartilage.
As an aging athlete, I've addressed bone spurs in both my hips and one shoulder.
2) How can aging athletes (who may have incurred more stress and abuse on their joints) best maintain joint functionality?
Which exercises, nutrition plans, supplements are best in this scenario?3) What is the difference between an achy joint versus arthritis in a joint?
These bony protrusions can become problematic if they are irregularly placing pressure on tendons and other soft tissue such as the rotator cuff in the shoulder.
My range of motion improved from seven to 28 (versus 35 on my left).
With a benign tumor on my pelvis over the right hip joint, my right hip is a mess.
I still run, bike, ski, etc., and am looking to take on more yoga and swimming.
How else can I avoid a hip replacement when I get older?
I’m glad to see you are making improvement with physical therapy and are motivated to stay active.
Knowing the underlying cause of your hip pain will be essential to giving you a plan for the future.
Both conditions have been mostly knocked out by a temporary prescription for meloxicam.
You should prepare a written history regarding the hip and knee pain including the length of symptoms, what makes the symptoms better or worse, how much pain you get, how much decreased function you experience, and history of physical therapy, brace use, medications, injections, imaging and surgeries.
You should also outline your goals to discuss with your joint preservation specialist.
These would include activities you would like to return to doing and any activities you would like to start doing.
Your visit with your joint preservation specialist will go in depth into the complex nature of osteoarthritis and the comprehensive plan that we have created.
There are many options available for treatment in the Joint Preservation Center, but a thorough history and physical is a must in order to determine which treatments are appropriate for you.
How do you find a joint preservation specialist?
I have never heard of this term before.
I am interested in PT, proper exercise, weight loss and NSAID's long before any surgery.
In the Joint Preservation Center, we love it when patients come excited about their care and interested in all the different options we have available.
Joint pain typically is a multi-factorial problem, and joint preservation typically involves a multi-modal approach.
We look forward to seeing you and appreciate your enthusiasm.
Can PRP be effective when there is bone on bone in the knee joint?
Bone-on-bone arthritis is the same as saying severe or "end-stage" osteoarthritis.
At this level of arthritis, we have been seeing that injection-based therapies are not as effective as when they are used for less severe osteoarthritis.
However, we have had many patients that note improvement in their symptoms despite the severity of their osteoarthritis.
Pain can come from several different places and from several different tissues in the knee joint. A joint preservation specialist can help you localize the pain-generating parts of your knee.
Are PRP injections or hyaluronic acid injections effective in relieving discomfort (six on a scale of one to 10) in bone-on-bone arthritis?
Also, do either of these treatments actually do anything to physiologically improve the joint?
A level six pain on a scale of one to 10 is the ideal pain score for the types of treatments we provide in the Joint Preservation Center.
We believe that both types of injections play a role in helping to manage the chronic inflammation present in some arthritic knees.
Not everyone responds to these treatments, mainly because each knee is unique, and the pain from osteoarthritis can come from several different places and from several different tissues in the knee joint. A joint preservation specialist can help you localize the pain-generating parts of your knee.
What can you do to stop the progression of knee arthritis and lower back pain from degenerative diseases?
I take pantaprazole and Zantac for the GERD.
What are acceptable nonprescription medications to take for orthopedic pain, Tylenol, NSAIDs?
You should avoid NSAIDs because of your GERD.
Tylenol could be effective for your pain; however, I am not aware of other medical problems that you may have that could eliminate Tylenol as an option.
These modalities range from topical NSAIDs, a TENS unit, various injections, hands-on manual therapy, comprehensive strengthening and stabilizing physical therapy, nutrition consultation with anti-inflammatory diet modification and anti-inflammatory supplements such as turmeric and curcumin, orthobiologic injections and cryoneurolysis.
What might cause someone to be more prone to experiencing labral tears (such as in the hips)?
Are there ways to prevent this from occurring in the future and to facilitate functioning when there is already a labral tear?
Labral tears, like other connective tissue injuries, occur from a combination of underlying anatomic alignment issues and overuse.
Specifically, in the hips, labral tears are more common in people who have FAI or femoroacetabular impingement.
If you think of the hip as a "ball and socket joint," FAI is a condition in which the femur (the ball) can become irregularly impinged against the acetabulum (socket) causing irregular mechanics, inflammation and possibly overload and tearing of the labrum.
Meeting with a joint preservation specialist can help to determine if this is an underlying cause of your hip pain and if you can help manage this condition through appropriate physical therapy, as well as the next steps in management.
Mechanical symptoms can be worrisome and sometimes quite bothersome.
Many times, "cracking and popping" are related to tendons, ligaments and thickened fascia snapping around bones.
An x-ray can show the underlying bones, and a musculoskeletal ultrasound (MSK-US) can give a nice, dynamic look at what might be causing the problem.
It could be as simple as a benign snapping of two tendons past each other, or it could be something more significant.
The good news is it is not painful for you.
I have osteoporosis and lupus, and I take Rayos, which is a steroid.
I take a low dose (10mg), but I take it daily.
Is the steroid weakening my bones?
Corticosteroid injections, also known as steroid or cortisone injections, primarily decrease inflammation.
Inflammation in the body can be harmful if not controlled.
However, inflammation is also what the body uses to heal damaged tissue.
Therefore, corticosteroid injections can have a role in alleviating pain, but the trade-off is an increased risk of damage to cartilage and connective tissue if misused or used too often.
The same goes for oral steroids; however, oral steroids act systemically and affect the entire body.
Injected steroids typically remain local and only affect the joint or tissue they are injected into.
Your physician should be able to describe the most appropriate route of using steroids and how often a steroid should be used.
He or she can also discuss the risks of that steroid for your specific condition.
I have heard that steroids or other injections may alleviate pain, but the effect eventually wears off and they can cause more damage to the joint.
Is this true, always, sometimes?
I am not familiar with the name of the procedure that came out of Europe and I believe is being used in the US.
The method, as I understand, uses stem cells on something like cheese cloth.
Apparently, they can grow new cartilage in this manner that can be placed in a joint area that has lost the cartilage.
In the Joint Preservation Center, we are constantly evaluating the best approaches to the treatment of acute and chronic joint pain.
There are hundreds of different orthobiologic companies offering many different solutions, and hundreds more on the way.
It brings together top orthopaedic surgeons, sports and exercise medicine physicians, physician assistants, physical therapists, athletic trainers, registered dietitians, radiologists and exercise physiologists to keep athletes in the game.
Download our free mobile app and access Ohio’s #1 care from anywhere you can get online.
Monthly self-exams have been under fire lately, but the truth is, most women find breast lumps themselves.
The best time to examine your breasts is after your menstrual cycle is finished.
Have your breasts examined by a healthcare provider at least once every three years after age 20, and every year after age 40.
How do I know if I’m developing osteoporosis?
Within two years of menopause, it is a good idea to talk to your physician about whether you need a bone density test.
This test is a simple, painless scan that determines bone mineral density.
You hear so much in the news about vitamin D, how much of it do I need?
Most people need to take a vitamin D supplement.
Recent evidence has suggested that adequate levels of vitamin D intake can reduce cancer incidence by 70 percent and increase longevity.
After having a Dilation and Curettage why did the bleeding start again?
Postoperative bleeding after a D&C can occur for about 6 weeks and may be continuous or stop and start.
Depending on your age and menstrual cycle, you may get your next period during this time.
If the bleeding is extremely heavy or persistent, you should see your doctor to check for other problems.
I have very heavy periods.
Should I be concerned about cancer?
Heavy bleeding does not usually point to cancer.
However, depending on your age and other risk factors, cancer or pre-cancer should be considered among other causes.
You should visit your gynecologist to determine the cause of your heavy bleeding, and treatment options.
It’s also important to learn about the many non-surgical alternatives to treat heavy periods.
How do I know which birth control pills are right for me?
Your physician will help you choose the right pill for you.
They fall into two main classes: progesterone only, and combined estrogen and progesterone pills.
Birth control pills - What happens if I miss a pill and start bleeding, how long will it last and will I get my period again when I get to the sugar pills?
It is best to set a routine around how you take your birth control pills to avoid missing pills.
If you forget to take a pill at the usual time, take it as soon as you remember.
Depending on what type of pills you are on and where in your cycle you are, spotting or prolonged bleeding may occur.
Call your doctor to discuss how to manage the bleeding and whether you need to use a backup method of birth control.
If your schedule makes it hard to keep up daily pill-taking, you may also want to discuss other types of birth control, such as a vaginal ring or IUD.
Do I have to take the placebo pills or can I start a new pack?
Most birth control pills contain 21 active pills and 7 inactive or reminder pills, also called placebo or sugar pills.
These extra pills serve to keep you in the habit of taking a daily pill during the week you are not taking active pills.
In some formulations, these 7 pills may contain iron or even low doses of estrogen.
If you have the Mirena®  inserted & it moves out of place, does that increase risk of pregnancy?
An IUD needs to be properly positioned to be effective.
Expulsion of an IUD is most common in the first 3 months and is usually related to improper placement of the IUD.
Your doctor should teach you how to check for the IUD string to ensure that it is in the right place.
If you cannot feel the string, see your doctor.
If your doctor can't see the strings, the IUD may need to be checked with an ultrasound.
If I am on my period today and the doctor switched me to a new birth control pill today, can I start the new pack today or do I have to wait until next month?
Birth control pills can be started in 3 ways: On the day your period starts, "Sunday start" or the Sunday after your period starts, or "Quick start" on any day of the cycle.
Backup contraception may be needed during the first pack of pills.
The "Quick start" method can be associated with a greater degree of irregular bleeding and may not be as protective during the first cycle.
How soon after I have sex can I take a pregnancy test?
Home pregnancy tests measure the amount of pregnancy hormone in urine.
The test will usually turn positive when the next period would have occurred or about 2 weeks after ovulation.
The time of ovulation differs slightly for every woman and is usually related to the overall length of the cycle.
I’m trying to get pregnant but haven’t so far.
How long should I wait before I see a fertility specialist?
Infertility is generally defined as not conceiving after one year of unprotected intercourse.
If you have been trying for a year or more, you and your partner may benefit from an evaluation.
What is required for the hypertensive patients if they want to keep their pregnancy without any danger?
See your Ob/Gyn for counseling even before you start trying to get pregnant.
Maintain a healthy weight with an appropriate level of exercise and see a nutritionist for tips.
Call your OB as soon as you know that you are pregnant for advice on what medications to stay on and which to stop.
Talk to your doctor about the warning signs for pre-eclampsia (also known as toxemia), such as headache and visual changes, as well as usual pregnancy concerns such as vaginal bleeding or cramping.
I am having horrible hot flashes and wake up in the middle of the night soaked in sweat.
Is there anything I can take for this?
For some women, menopausal symptoms are a minor inconvenience.
For others, continual hot flashes and night sweats lead to sleep deprivation, physical discomfort and social embarrassment.
I’m postmenopausal and began using Prempro 2 months ago.
Last week I started bleeding, like a period, and have very tender breasts.
Is this normal or should I see my doctor?
Will it stop on its own?
These symptoms often occur after initiating hormone therapy and may be related to the strength, formulation or dosing schedule of the hormones you are taking.
Occasionally, vaginal bleeding may be related to other conditions such as benign polyps, pre-cancer or cancer of the uterus or cervix.
Speak with your doctor to discuss if watchful waiting, changing your hormone regimen or further testing is right for you.
What do you recommend for treatment of an ovarian cyst (3 cm) in a 47 yr. old menopausal woman.?
Pain in lower back associated with this cyst.
History of dermoid tumor on left ovary, and mother had ovarian cancer.
Ovarian cysts after menopause commonly cause anxiety for patients.
Multiple factors should be considered to decide if the cyst can be followed with repeat imaging or should be removed surgically: the size and features of the cyst on ultrasound, additional symptoms such as pain, as well as your personal and family history.
Your doctor may order a CA-125 blood test, but this test should not be considered a screening test for ovarian cancer.
See your doctor to discuss your concerns.
Can Premarin cause uterine cancer?
The estrogen contained in hormone therapy promotes growth of the uterine lining.
This can lead to uterine precancer and cancer.
Women who have not had a hysterectomy should take progesterone in addition to estrogen to protect the uterus from too much stimulation.
The progesterone may be taken continuously or for only 2 weeks out of every month.
Can HPV go away if it is left untreated?
Even if it did, can it cause other problems?
Infection with HPV (Human Papilloma Virus) can lead to cervical cancer and pre-cancer and genital warts.
For some women, the immune system will clear HPV within 24 months.
For other women, the virus can persist indefinitely.
Screening for HPV and frequency of pap tests depends on your age, personal health history and risk factors.
Follow up routinely with your doctor for regular pelvic exams and to establish when your next pap test should be done.
Ask your doctor if you are a candidate for the HPV vaccine.
I go regularly, every year, for my pap test and everything is fine.
My doctor suggested that I have a sonogram, a procedure that inserts into you a camera to check your ovaries.
He said it might show something that doesn't show up in a regular pap.
Is that something you would recommend to have done when no problems are evident?
I would recommend that you follow the instructions for an ultrasound as requested by your physician.
The ultrasound can check for the size of the uterus and the presence of fibroids or ovarian cysts.
At what age can you stop getting PAP tests?
Women should begin PAP tests within 3 years of sexual activity.
If someone is not sexually active, PAP tests should begin by age 21.
The current recommendation for interval screening is an annual PAP test for 3 years.
If negative, the test is done every 3 years.
The cause of cervical cancer is due to the HPV virus.
How can I know if the menstruation pain is because I have tumors or ovarian (cysts)??
Most women have menstrual pain (cramps) with menstrual cycles.
If the pain is not easily relieved with other the counter (OTC) meds like Aleve, Motrin or Tylenol ... or if you are unable to participate in work, travel, hobbies, sports... then you should see your physician.
My daughter is 18 and she has strong pain every month.
The doctor had said she probably has some (cysts) in her ovaries.
Can this be true if she is very young?
Beginning with the onset of menstruation until menopause, ovarian cysts are made monthly.
Cysts are usually not cancerous and are small.
When they enlarge more than 5 centimeters doctors may advise birth control pills and a repeat transvaginal ultrasound to determine if the cyst resolves.
Is it normal to experience rectal pain during your menstrual cycle?
This is the only time the pain occurs, and is sharp shooting pain and usually never lasts longer than 10 seconds... it's also more frequent when I need to release bowels.
Rectal pain may be normal however endometriosis can also be the cause of rectal pain during menses.
I am a 36 year old woman.
Due to ovarian cysts, fibroid tumors, excessive bleeding, pain, and troubled pregnancies, I had a hysterectomy back in 2001.
This past weekend, after sex, I experienced pain in the lower abdomen, followed by a dark brown vaginal discharge.
I know this is usually the body cleansing itself of dead blood, but with me having had a hysterectomy, what could this have been?
It has cleared up now, but do I still need to go see a doctor?
It is not normal to have vaginal bleeding after a hysterectomy.
Sometimes bleeding may be due to endometriosis that can still occur after a hysterectomy because you still have your ovaries.
When does menopause typically begin and how do you know you are in menopause?
The definition of menopause is the absence of menstruation for 12 consecutive months.
The average is 51 years; however by age 51 only 80% of women have stopped their periods.
By age 55, 95% of women have stopped their periods.
By age 58, 100% of women should stop menses.
When will I know I have started menopause?
Vaginal estrogen did not help painful vaginal dryness.
HRT helps, but I have been on it for 10 years.
Are there any other choices?
There are three ways to take vaginal estrogen (vaginal creams, vaginal rings or vaginal tablets.)
I would recommend switching from whatever product you are currently using to another product.
After having a hysterectomy in 2001, I sometimes experience the same symptoms as before (abdominal pain, swelling, nausea).
If the hysterectomy was done to eliminate the possibility of getting cysts and tumors again, what could be happening to me?
Can they actually come back after a hysterectomy?
A hysterectomy only removes the uterus and cervix.
This is called a partial hysterectomy.
Is Fibromyalgia part of the menopause symptoms??
Some patients during menopause will experience muscle aches and joint stiffness.
Fibromyalgia has many additional symptoms that are unrelated to menopause.
At times, bumps arise on my private areas (vagina, butt, between legs).
They are like abscesses.
They are filled with pus and blood, and are very painful.
They are large in circumference, and don't get any better until they are drained.
What are these bumps called, why are they present, and what can be done about them?
The 'private areas' have oil glands and hair follicles.
Believe it or not, these areas can develop acne.
Very often, these small abscesses are due to inflamed hair follicles or oil glands.
Two years ago I had a breast reduction (Size Double I to B).
They had to remove my nipples and put them back on.
During the healing process, they were black and it was unsure if they would take.
After about 3 weeks they were turning pink.
Now, I am getting a smelly discharge from them.
Is this normal, or does it indicate a problem?
Any discharge from the breast related or even unrelated to surgical procedures should always be evaluated.
There are very few reasons for having a discharge i.e. recent breast feeding or recent surgery less than six months.
It is recommended to see your doctor for an examination and additional testing.
One week after a spinal, I experienced slight incontinence with coughing.
If nerve was injured or affected, what can be done?
Years later, I now have frequent urinary leakage beginning.
This is most likely a coincidence, but is unrelated.
There are many causes of frequent urination including diabetes, urinary tract infection (UTI), too much caffeine or water.
I have been getting the Depo Provera shots for two years now, and will not be getting another one as my husband and I are going to try to have a baby.
How long does it take for the Depo to get out of my system?
How long before I could conceivably become pregnant?
Depo Provera is an excellent method of birth control.
Usually, the method will be effective for 12-16 weeks.
However, it is not uncommon have the effects on the menstrual cycle for 6 -18 months following the last injection.
We are ready to close the chat for today.
I am happy to have been involved with this session.
It is best to perform the exam about one week after your menstrual cycle.
If you do not have menstrual cycles, then choose the same time each month to do a breast exam.
What are the current recommendations regarding pelvic exams?
Pelvic exam should be initiated at onset of sexual activity for STD checks.
If not sexually active, at age 21.
Yearly pelvic exams are recommended.
Kegel exercises – is this taught by PT or your doctor or a nurse?
You can teach yourself Kegel’s, it is that easy.
Check the Internet, your nurse or physician for directions.
It does not require a PT.
At what age do you recommend a younger girl start seeing a gynecologist, versus continuing to see their pediatrician?
Most pediatricians will follow their patients until age 21.
Likewise, if there are complaints or gynecologic health issues that the pediatrician cannot address, then a referral to a gynecologist would be made.
Any new contraceptives on the market?
Mirena®  (progesterone only intrauterine contraception - IUC) have gained renewed interest by physicians and marketing (commercials.)
