Can you tell us about the nonsurgical treatment options for juvenile rheumatoid arthritis?
There are many nonsurgical treatments for juvenile arthritis.
In fact, surgery is typically a therapy of last resort for our patients.
Broadly speaking, nonsurgical therapies include medications that act to reduce pain, medications that act on the immune system to reduce inflammation, and supportive interventions such as physical or occupational therapy.
It is important to remember that abnormalities in the immune system cause arthritis symptoms in children, so definitive therapy requires the use of medications that target the immune system.
We're in the early stages of my child's JRA diagnosis.
What types of medication will my son be on, and will he be on drugs for the rest of his life?
It partly depends on the subtype of JIA your child has.
Typically, JIA treatment involves an initial induction phase, when medications are used to make the active arthritis disease inactive (on medication).
After a period of disease inactivity, while on medication(s), then there is an attempt to lesson medication use, hoping that the disease will remain inactive or, in a sense, be in remission.
Different subtypes of JIA and different individual patients require more or less medication doses and duration to achieve inactive disease.
Can you please discuss stem cell transplant as treatment?
Stem cell transplant is not standard treatment for children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), but has been performed more commonly in patients with severe forms of the JIA subtype systemic-onset JIA, or polyarticular JIA.
Protocols for autologous stem cell transplant in children are becoming more refined in these settings as more is learned about the appropriate protocols to be used, which are safer and more effective.
Treatment is always based on the best risk-benefit ratio for the patient, so stem cell therapy is reserved typically for patients who remain steroid dependent and whose disease remains active despite other more conventional therapies.
We are involved in a national consortium of pediatric physicians who evaluate and treat children with diseases other than oncologic diagnosis that require bone marrow transplant.
She is on nabumetone at the present time.
Now our doctor has recommended Humira® injections.
What are the long-term effects these medications have on children?
Also, are there any natural or organic alternatives that may helpful?
Nabumetone belongs to a class of medications called nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS).
These NSAIDs offer about a 30 percent improvement in pain levels, but fail to fundamentally act on the immune system to stop the inflammatory process, which leads to arthritis.
Current treatment recommendations for juvenile arthritis incorporate these NSAIDs for pain control, but more directed therapies, such as methotrexate are advised.
A drug such as Humira® (adalimumab) is typically reserved for those patients who have failed to improve on other medications including methotrexate, leflunomide (Arava©), or sulfasalazine.
My daughter has been on Actemra® for about six months now.
She has problems with hives and itching.
Thus far, Actemra® (tocilizumab) is used to treat children with systemic-onset JIA.
Hives and itching may be seen in children who have active systemic JIA.
However, children receiving Actemra® may also experience hives and itching during or immediately following their infusion.
In this scenario, their symptoms are likely a low-grade allergic reaction to Actemra® .
Use of medications such as steroids, Benadryl® , and Tylenol® prior to the Actemra® infusions may help prevent or decrease the severity of these symptoms.
My son is on naproxen, but is still in pain.
Pain in JRA is a common complaint but might not always be related to a child's JRA.
If pain is related to certain activities, then an assessment and treatment by a physical therapist may be necessary.
Children with JRA may also suffer from sleep disturbances, anxiety, or depression, which may manifest as complaints of pain.
Our approach is to first determine if a child's pain is due to active arthritis using imaging tests such as MRI or ultrasound.
If there are no signs of active arthritis, then we will refer families to a specialized multidisciplinary team consisting of physical therapists, pain medicine physicians, sleep medicine doctors, and psychologists to help families reduce their child's pain.
Our pediatrician feels that our 13-year-old daughter should see a pediatric rheumatologist, but we do not know where to begin.
Do you see many patients from out of state?
Is this a situation where you would see her one-two times and then the pediatrician would manage, or will she need to always have her care coordinated by a rheumatologist, even as she gets older?
There is a national shortage of pediatric rheumatologists.
In fact, 13 states have no access to a pediatric rheumatologist.
Since 2008, our pediatric rheumatologists have seen almost 300 children from 34 states and 10 countries for second opinions regarding their autoimmune disease.
We make great efforts to continue to support these families after they leave our clinic and provide them with world-class care.
Are there support groups for children who have been diagnosed with arthritis as teens?
The Arthritis Foundation has a wonderful Web site (arthritis.org) designed to support children and families with arthritis.
At these SMAs, six to eight children with JRA and their families sit down together for an educational session, activity, and an individual visit with a health care provider.
These sessions last two hours.
Families and patients have told us how much they enjoy the support they receive from the other participants in these SMAs.
What foods or drinks trigger hot flashes?
Common foods that trigger hot flashes are spicy food, caffeine, and warm beverages.
When will the hot flashes end?
Unfortunately, there is no set time as to how long menopausal hot flashes will last.
Every woman experiences menopausal symptoms uniquely.
Many women have the worst symptoms even before menopause occurs, during perimenopause.
There is really no reason to suffer and tough it out.
There are many safe treatment options available that may be right for you.
Small fluctuations in blood pressure and heart rate may occur when someone is under increased stress, which is how you may feel during a "hot flash"!
Is there any way to cool down without being obvious to those around you?
The most important thing is to dress in light layers because it is the fluctuation of ambient temperature that really triggers hot flashes.
Also, practice paced abdominal breathing (six to eight slow breaths/minute).
Do this for 15 minutes, three times a day, and try this during a hot flash.
How long do hot flashes persist without treatment?
I hear all the time that their mother breezed through hot flashes but they are really suffering, or vice versa.
Many women have the worst symptoms during perimenopause -- five to seven years before menopause actually occurs.
I had cancer and had to have a hysterectomy (TAH) at the age of 41.
I was given hormone replacement for the next 10 years.
Once I was off the hormones, I went into menopause, and for the last 10 years, I have been having the hot flashes and night sweats.
I have not worn a sweater in 10 years and that is depressing.
There are many lifestyle modifications that may help relieve symptoms of hot flashes, including identifying and avoiding your triggers.
These may include stress, caffeine, alcohol, spicy food, tight clothing, and cigarette smoking.
Other tips include I have been having some bad hot flashes, especially while I am sleeping.
I wake up drenched.
What can I do to help prevent this on a nightly basis?
If you are having hot flashes due to menopause, there are many treatment options available to you, both lifestyle and pharmacologic agents.
If the hot flashes are bothering you mostly at night, make sure the room is cool.
Sleep in light layers.
Avoid using down comforters, because you can bake like an oven.
You may try wearing socks to bed, because this may bring down your core body temperature.
Try sleeping with a chill pillow.
The gold standard of treatment for hot flashes due to menopause is hormone therapy.
Check with your doctor if this is right for you.
What can you do to help with night sweats?
The gold standard to treat moderate to severe night sweats that disturb your sleep is hormone therapy, if you do not have any contraindications.
There are also other non-hormonal medications that are used to help treat hot flashes, including low-dose antidepressants (SSRIs) and gabapentin (an anti-seizure medication).
Unfortunately, this is true for many women.
Metabolism slows down as we get older and muscle mass also naturally diminishes.
This will slow the rate at which we burn calories and will shift our body composition to more fat.
The decrease in estrogen after menopause often shifts weight distribution to around the belly in women.
Weight gain is also impacted greatly by lifestyle and genetics.
Once a woman hits menopause and starts to have weight problems and muscle tone problems, which were previously not concerns prior to menopause, would it be good idea to get hormone levels checked?
Thyroid is fine and activity level is very good (runs marathons and does weight training.)
Hormone levels are not always necessary to confirm menopause.
Natural menopause is defined as one year without a period and can be evident with associated menopausal symptoms.
Hormone levels can be useful when patients are on bioidentical hormone therapy to monitor therapy.
Getting the weight down will definitely help control hot flashes.
Unfortunately, after menopause, this may be more difficult because metabolism will slow down.
This means you really need to concentrate on increasing your physical activity and watching your calorie count!
I have lost a great amount of weight since entering menopause.
Have you ever heard of this?
Usually we see women gain weight during menopause because of a slowed metabolism.
If you have a lot of unintentional weight loss, make sure to have this further investigated by your PCP.
You need to make sure you are updated with all of your screening examinations.
I am 51 and starting taking Premarin® in March for hot flashes and low libido.
That was done about 11 years ago.
Also, does it take a while for the Premarin® to work?
I take the lowest dosage, 0.64, a day.
It seems like it still does not help that much, somewhat, but not a lot.
I’m hoping to hear from you.
If you have no contraindications, Premarin® (conjugated estrogens) is an excellent medication to help treat postmenopausal hot flashes.
You may only see its maximum effect after four weeks of use.
If you are still having symptoms on this medication, talk with your physician to see if you may need a slightly higher dose; but all medication should be monitored.
Since you have had a hysterectomy, you only need to be treated with estrogen.
There are many different modes of therapy, including pills, patches, and gels.
Find out which one is right for you.
I had a hysterectomy at 23, so have been on estrogen therapy (Premarin® ) for the last 35 years.
I'm on the lowest dosage, taken every other day, but have been concerned about long-term side effects.
At the time I was put on it, there wasn't much information on it.
I don't feel good without it.
What can you tell me about this?
There is no time limit for how long someone should stay on hormone therapy.
Your hormones were taken away at a very early age, which normally would not have happened.
Therefore it was definitely a good idea to replace your hormones.
The average age of menopause is about 51.
After the age of 60, metabolism does slow down; therefore, you may need less of the hormone to obtain the same efficacy.
The greatest risk of any hormone therapy, including birth control, is the risk of blood clots.
Therefore, make sure that your hormone therapy is being monitored actively by your physician.
Finding the right dose and mode to deliver the therapy (ex., pill versus patch versus gel) is important to control your symptoms, help protect your bones, and stop vaginal atrophy.
Is the use of vaginal estrogen less risky?
The use of local vaginal estrogen does not have systemic effects.
There may be minimal absorption initially when using this due to the thinning of the vaginal tissue, but with continued use, this improves.
I have osteopenia (-1.9 spine, -1.4 hip, slightly worse than two years ago), hot flashes, sleep disturbance, fibrocystic breasts, fibromyalgia, HIV, LMP 08/24/03, and have never been pregnant.
My paternal grandmother had breast cancer as well as my aunt.
I have had three lumpectomies that were negative.
My OB/GYN prescribed Prempro® (third year of taking this medication).
My breasts are tender and painful at times, which my OB/GYN says is because I am on HRT.
It never happened when I took the pill (BCP).
I take Centrum® Silver® (500 mg calcium, 800 IU vitamin D) as well as Citracal® with Magnesium (500 mg calcium, 250 IU vitamin D) and take D3 1000 IUs with the Citracal® .
Recently I forgot to add Prempro® to my medication basket and don't know how long I was without it.
I didn't suffer any hot flashes or night sweats.
Should I be on HRT?
When looking at your risk factors for breast cancer -- having multiple breast biopsies, dense breasts, never having a child, and increasing age – you may be at increased risk for developing breast cancer.
If menopause is triggered suddenly by chemotherapy for leukemia what is the risk of HRT?
I have completely gone through menopause and did so fairly easily.
But now, a year later, I have started to put on a lot of belly fat even though I work out regularly.
I also have occasional hot flashes.
I know these are all symptoms of menopause.
Someone suggested using a natural prednisone cream for 21 days and then off for 7.
Do you have any other recommendations?
I do not want to take medications and would like to take care of this naturally if possible.
Natural progesterone is used in combination with estrogen to treat symptomatic menopausal women.
There are bioidentical FDA-approved hormones that can be used to help treat hot flashes.
Compounded natural progesterone cream is not effective in protecting the uterus from estrogen’s stimulation and will not protect against uterine cancer.
Do you think bioidentical hormone therapy is a correct treatment for hysterectomy If you have had a hysterectomy and still have your ovaries, you still may not be in menopause.
If you are starting to have menopausal symptoms, and are around the average age of menopause, 51, you can get blood work to help confirm.
If you are having moderate to severe symptoms of menopause and do not have contraindications, then bioidentical hormones may be an excellent choice for you.
This is available in different modes -- patches/creams/gels.
I had a mammogram in September and all was well.
However, I have some leaking out of both breasts that is clear from the nipples if I squeeze the nipples.
I told my doctor, but he didn't think I needed to do anything as my mammogram was OK.
I breast fed both my children.
They are 25 and 22 now.
I am just wondering if that is OK also.
Clear discharge from the nipple may be physiologic, but anything that is new for you or out of the ordinary does deserve an initial work up.
Discharge that is milky, bloody, or purulent (like pus) does need immediate investigation.
I am a 38-year-old woman who had cervical cancer at the age of 28 and had a partial hysterectomy then.
Three years ago, I had my ovaries removed as well, and because of breast issues, I have not had any hormone therapy at all.
I've adjusted to the hot flashes and had some panic attacks at first, but those have gone away as well.
My biggest issue is my complete lack of sex drive, and by "lack of" I mean NONE!
Low libido is a difficult situation many women go through, which can be disruptive to relationships.
It is also a complex situation that has many different factors that may come into play, including stress, your relationship status, pain during intercourse/dryness, the ability to climax, enjoying sexual intercourse once you do.
Can a "surgical hysterectomy" cause anxiety and severe acid reflux/digestive system problems (swelling in the throat and constipation)?
A surgical hysterectomy alone should not result in all of your symptoms.
If your ovaries were also removed, you are now in surgical menopause and no longer have the estrogen that your body used to have.
This may contribute to the classic symptoms of hot flashes and vaginal dryness.
If these hot flashes are distressing and lead to poor sleep, this can definitely contribute to stress, anxiety, irritability and fatigue.
Does menopause affect your bowels?
I had a TAH/BSO in April 2010, and since then, I have had to increase my Colace® dose to three gelcaps/day.
I am also using Metamucil® once a day, and it still is difficult to have a formed BM.
My BMs are consistently "bunny bullets" and at best only once a day.
Prior to the surgery, I had, on average, one to two well-formed BMs each day.
I am a vegetarian and I drink at least one to two liters of water every day.
I am 54 years old.
I’m just not sure if I need to do anything other than what I am doing now.
Menopause in itself should not affect your bowel habits.
Sometimes after surgery people can develop adhesions/scar tissue, which may contribute to constipation.
Other helpful options to keep your bowel movements regular include regular physical exercise and adding a magnesium supplement.
You may also try Miralax® which is found over the counter to keep a good bowel regimen.
Can menopause be blamed for muscle achiness and stiffness?
Can vaginal dryness be reversed after menopause by having more sex?
As the years pass after periods cease, do things level off.
For instance, brain fogginess, cranky mood swings, etc.
Do you recommend over-the-counter sleep aids to get through the sleeplessness and the night sweats?
There is that expression that if you don't use it you lose it!
So regular sexual intercourse can help with vaginal dryness!
But you may also need moisturizers/lubricants.
To help improve the vaginal tissue (vaginal atrophy), we recommend local hormone therapy available in cream/tablet or even ring.
2) I wonder if heavier menstrual flows are normal during perimenopause.
During perimenopause, the menstrual cycle may change.
It can become irregular (skipped months), lighter, and heavier as well.
Depending on how heavy your periods are, for example, if you are overflowing, or are anemic, you may need some other work-up to make sure there is not another reason for heavy periods.
What would some of the perimenopause systems (symptoms) be?
The symptoms of perimenopause vary between women and include irregular periods (skipped months).
They may become lighter/heavier.
Some women start to feel hot flashes and night sweats as well.
If these disturb sleep and cause stress, sometimes women may feel more emotional/irritable during this transition.
Does having a hysterectomy prolong menopausal symptoms?
Having a hysterectomy should not prolong your menopausal symptoms, but there has been some evidence of going through menopause slightly earlier after a hysterectomy.
When can you be certain menopause has completed?
The definition of menopause is one year without a period.
The average age is 51, but can be as early as early 40s to as late as late 50s.
After this, you are postmenopausal and this remains life-long.
The duration of symptoms of menopause vary, unfortunately, among women.
Maintaining a low body mass index is imperative to keep your intra-abdominal pressure down and may help with stopping the progression of varices.
When a child goes to the doctor or to the emergency room with what looks like syncope, one of our differential diagnoses -- something we need to rule out -- would be a seizure disorder.
What are the causes of syncope and how common is it?
Syncope has numerous causes; but in children, the most common cause is a simple faint, which is also called 'vasovagal syncope,' 'vasodepressive syncope,' or 'neurocardiogenic syncope.'
What triggers fainting and how can we prevent fainting?
Triggers of syncope in kids include What is psychogenic syncope?
One of the most important causes of syncope in pediatric patients, in particular adolescents, is psychogenic syncope.
Several features will help a physician to distinguish psychogenic from neurocardiogenic syncope.
Does he need to see a doctor?
Dizziness in children can have several causes.
It could be a pre-syncopal symptom; it could occur prior to a migraine; it could be related to an inner ear problem (for example, labrynthitis from a viral infection); or it could be due to a cardiac lesion.
Sometimes, we know my son is about to faint because he gets very lightheaded.
An episode of fainting is typically preceded by a period called a prodrome that can last from several seconds to one to two minutes.
This period usually has distinctive warning features such as If my child is fainting, does he have a serious heart condition?
If a child presents with syncope, the first thing to look for would be a cardiac cause.
However, it is less common than vasovagal syncope.
How does a ‘history’ help you make a diagnosis of syncope?
The patient history is the cornerstone on which the diagnosis of syncope is made.
Important points in the history include What tests will my child have to find the cause of her fainting attacks?
The doctor can use certain diagnostic tests for a child with frequent fainting attacks.
Before diagnosing syncope, it is important to rule out other causes, such as seizure disorders or cardiac problems as the reason for the fainting.
What happens during a tilt table test?
The test is done by positioning the patient head upright at an angle of 60-80 degrees for 15 to 60 minutes on a tilt table with a supporting footboard.
The test is positive when the symptoms of syncope or pre-syncope are reproduced.
What is the treatment of syncope?
Once a diagnosis of neurocardiogenic or vasovagal syncope is confirmed, treatment requires Will a child have this problem all his life?
The prognosis for recovery is excellent in neurocardiogenic syncope.
Most patients show spontaneous recovery of their syncope and presyncope in the first year after onset.
Five percent to 10 percent, will, however, continue to show symptoms over an extended period of time, often up to five years.
PTH stands for parathyroid hormone.
What are the risks of parathyroid disease?
Often, people develop parathyroid disease from a benign tumor, or from one or more glandular enlargements.
Sometimes, the disease runs in families and can occur with some other endocrine gland overactivity.
What symptoms would indicate a parathyroid problem?
Most patients with a parathyroid problem have no symptoms, and a routine blood test tells the physician that there may be an issue.
Some patients may have subtle and non-specific symptoms, such as muscle and joint aches and pains, increased urination, and an inability to think clearly (foggy memory).
More clear-cut signs and symptoms are bone loss (may show up on bone density test) and kidney stones.
How is parathyroid disease treated?
The BEST treatment for primary parathyroid disease (that could occur from a benign parathyroid adenoma or enlargement of multiple parathyroid glands) is surgery.
This can be curative.
I will start using the synthetic parathyroid hormone Forteo®  in the near future to build bone density.
Is there a recommendation as to how long someone should wait to start using Forteo®  after having been on Fosamax® ?
When using Forteo® , are there special considerations regarding calcium intake?
It is best to start Forteo®  (teriparatide) right after discontinuing Fosamax®  (alendronate).
Forteo®  can increase blood and urine calcium levels transiently.
So my recommendation would be: if you are getting enough calcium in your diet (via dairy and other calcium-rich food), it is best to avoid supplements.
I take Boniva®  and Synthroid.
Would it be better to take Forteo® ?
I did have high blood pressure, but no longer do since I have been exercising regularly and drinking more water.
If Boniva®  (ibandronate) is working for you, there is no need to switch to Forteo® .
Blood work and bone density scans can point you (and your physician) in the right direction.
Having an underactive thyroid and taking Synthroid (levothyroxine) will not affect your bone health unless you are taking too much (since too much Synthroid can contribute to bone loss).
I am glad to hear that your BP is normal!
Let me say that most patients with vitamin D deficiency and low calcium do not have stones.
However, low calcium levels (from lack of calcium in the diet and/or supplements) can cause recurrent stones in a person who is predisposed to stone formation.
Kidney stones can occur from a variety of causes.
How much vitamin D do you recommend for good bone health, and can it reverse osteoporosis?
Most adult patients, in my experience, seem to need somewhere between 1000 to 3000 IU of vitamin D daily.
BUT, there is a WIDE variation in the amounts, and the best way to determine the best dose for you is to have your levels tested.
My blood level of vitamin D has not been tested, but if it should test extremely low, how much vitamin D supplementation would you recommend?
Are there any upper limits above which it would be toxic?
I usually start with 50,000 IU once or twice a week depending on how low the levels are and after making sure the calcium level is not high.
Levels above 80 to 100 (I am not sure of the units here) are considered to be in the toxic range.
Will thyroid tests also detect problems in the parathyroid glands?
The thyroid and parathyroid glands do completely different things.
They have similar sounding names, since they are in the same area of the body (front of the neck).
A thyroid panel (TSH and free T4) will give a good idea of a thyroid problem.
Most parathyroid gland problems (the most common being an overactive gland) are detected on a calcium lab test.
What types of tests are used to determine thyroid or parathyroid problem in a patient?
I have been on Fosamax®  for nearly a year and calcium supplements for over a year.
The best screening thyroid tests are TSH and free T4.
The best tests for a parathyroid problem are serum calcium, PTH, and 25 hydroxy vitamin D. I have osteoporosis and a history of kidney stones since my teenage years.
If I take calcium for the osteoporosis, I get a lot of kidney stones.
So what can I take or do to stop bone loss and not have a bunch of kidney stones to deal with?
I am 75 years old.
Kidney stones actually recur more from LOW calcium.
In your case, it may be much better to get all of your calcium needs met from DIET rather than supplements.
Calcium from diet is much less likely to cause problems with stone recurrence.
A bisphosphonate and adequate vitamin D is also advisable for osteoporosis, along with calcium.
I also was taking Actonel®  35mg once a week for 10+ years, but stopped taking it this past year because my last DXA scan showed I lost bone density (T-score: L/S spine: -2.9 and hip: -2.3).
Do I need to take a drug holiday from the Actonel® ?
Bone loss after taking Actonel®  (risedronate) for 10+ years means (1) your body may not have absorbed it at all or (2) it did not work for you.
Is there a relationship between hyperparathyroidism and breast cancer?
If a person is experiencing fatigue, what should be looked at, especially with the parathyroid?
To rule out a parathyroid problem, it may be worth checking a calcium PTH and a vitamin D level.
In addition to the fatigue and depression, I also have had many bouts with gastrointestinal discomfort.
Could this be related in any way with the thyroid, parathyroid, Fosamax® , and calcium supplements?
An overactive parathyroid gland can cause abdominal pain.
Fosamax®  can also cause some stomach discomfort.
Thyroid problems uncommonly present with gastrointestinal discomfort, but can easily be picked up by a simple blood test.
Is it common for a patient with hyperparathyroid disease to be diagnosed with POTS?
I know there are many symptoms related to hyperparathyroidism.
How common is it to have high blood pressure with tachycardia?
I am not aware of an association between hyperparathyroidism and POTS (postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome).
If your therapeutic range for thyroid is at 1/4 range, and you are still sleeping 9 to 9½ hours a day, should your medication be changed?
I was on Fosamax®  for 13 years and went off of it two years ago.
I just had a bone scan and the reading is about the same.
My hip is -2.7 and the spine is -2.2.
I asked the doctor about Forteo® , but he said I need to have a break before getting it.
I am not sure what he is telling me.
He did give me Evista®  (raloxifene), but I am not sure how much good it will do.
Can you advise me?
I know they do this for the heart.
You will need to copy and paste this into the address bar.
My cousin found out she had a parathyroid problem because of something that was happening to her fingernails.
What is this and how would this be an indicator?
I am not aware of any relationship between a parathyroid problem and fingernails.
I went through IVF 20 years ago and did not conceive.
Have the fertility treatment options (medications, IUI, IVF) improved since the late 1980s?
In vitro fertilization (IVF) success rates have dramatically improved in the past 20 years, from under 10 percent to over 35 percent per cycle on average.
Pregnancy rates with frozen embryos have also gone way up.
In addition, ancillary procedures, such as intra cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) for severe male factor infertility, have only become available within the past 10 years.
Another improvement is that most of the medications can now be given as subcutaneous injections (under the skin with a tiny needle) versus intramuscular injections which required someone to give the shot in the "butt" muscle.
Artificial Insemination success rates seem very low.
First, we have to put things in perspective.
The monthly pregnancy rate in the fertile population is only about 20 percent.
The monthly pregnancy rate with unexplained infertility is 2 percent to 3 percent.
Treatment with artificial intrauterine insemination (IUI) alone is of little benefit.
Combining IUI with an oral fertility drug, such as Clomid® (clomiphene) or Femara® (letrozole) yields about a 10 percent pregnancy rate per cycle.
This is typically tried for up to six cycles, at which time we may continue the IUIs, substituting the more potent injectable fertility drugs for pregnancy rates of up to 20 percent per treatment cycle, i.e., back to the normal baseline rate.
This is usually tried up to three cycles before moving on to IVF.
I have gone through all the tests to see why I am not able to get pregnant, with no explanation.
Adding a fertility drug like Clomid® to IUI for three to six cycles, based on your age, would be the recommendation.
When the doctors talk about the size of follicles, what does that mean in terms of chance of success?
The follicles are the cysts within the ovaries that contain the eggs.
The follicles grow as the eggs mature.
The follicle ruptures at ovulation and the egg is released.
We measure the size of each follicle every few days when women are taking injectable fertility drugs in preparation for IUI or IVF in order to adjust the medication dose according to the responsiveness of the ovaries and to time the IUI or egg collection optimally.
Ideally, we want two to four mature eggs for IUI.
Too many can increase the risk for multiple pregnancy and over-stimulate the ovaries.
We hope to retrieve 10 to 20 eggs for IVF.
They suggest using "particular types of culture media" that actually coat the embryo with these sticky proteins so it "glues" itself to the endometrium until it implants.
However, it really doesn't work well, and most labs -- including ours -- don't use it.
How many ‘tries’ before giving up?
At what point do you tell your patient that there is no hope?
I have 10 failed ‘attempts’ (IVF  and IUI’s).
Is it realistic to keep trying?
I like to meet with patients after each failed cycle to review it and discuss the next treatment plan.
I feel patients need realistic expectations, and I tell them what their chances are with another attempt.
They can then make an informed decision regarding whether they wish to keep trying.
Many patients run out of emotional and financial reserves before we advise that they stop trying.
The former is an outpatient surgical procedure under general anesthesia.
We have been TTC for 1.5 years.
We have been to a fertility specialist who thinks I have endometriosis (one 2.5 cm persistent possible chocolate cyst and pain during month).
Otherwise healthy (egg health perfect, AMH perfect, progesterone is 11.6, I am ovulating and HSG was fine).
My husband has male factor infertility (2 SAs: 1-3 million/ML concentration, 3-7.5 million count, 20 percent motility, and 4 percent to 6 percent morphology).
The doctor recommended IVF and we have chosen not to pursue that.
Is there any benefit to me having laparoscopy to achieve pregnancy?
I have put it off because my pain is tolerable, and I don't want to have surgery unless necessary Endometriosis is diagnosed and treated by laparoscopy as an outpatient.
I would agree with your doctor that IVF is your best treatment option if your husband's semen analysis can't be significantly improved.
In this case, treating the endometriosis first won't improve your chances with IVF, so there would be no benefit, especially since you don't have bad pain.
If I have the laparoscopy, how likely will the endometriosis reappear and how soon could that start to happen?
And with his male factor infertility, will my surgery even help us conceive?
Endometriosis is a progressive disease that can get worse until menopause, at which time it regresses.
It may recur following complete surgical removal, but it's usually not rapidly progressive.
I recommend that women with endometriosis take birth control pills to keep the disease suppressed whenever they are not pregnant or trying to conceive.
Laparoscopic treatment of endometriosis may improve fertility if there is also a mild male factor.
More severe male factor infertility is best treated by IVF.
In that case, we would advise treatment of endometriosis only if there is a large endometriosis cyst (endometrioma).
You mentioned laparoscopy isn't necessary if we do IVF.
What if we choose not to do IVF?
With his male factor infertility, how much would laparoscopy help us, if at all?
The chance for success with severe male factor infertility is low even with a normal fertile female partner.
I don't suspect that treating the endometriosis would substantially improve the odds of conception.
In dealing with male infertility, what are the common treatments?
I have heard that Clomid® is a standard treatment.
How does that compare to how women are treated with the same drug?
Treatments for male infertility may include antibiotics for infection, surgery to relieve blocks in the sperm ducts, and hormones, which may include Clomid® , to correct specific abnormalities.
Clomid® is not very effective for unexplained male infertility.
Since most male infertility is unexplained, the usual treatments are artificial insemination if the numbers are adequate or IVF if they are too low.
Is there a more effective drug than Clomid® to use with artificial insemination?
Clomid® is usually the first-line treatment.
Femara® is used exactly as Clomid® , but it works through a different mechanism.
