In my book, I detail how a doctor and an individual woman can go about dealing with vexing mood symptoms and perimenopausal symptoms which can collide at the same time!
In the future, we are expecting the first FDA approved non-hormonal medication, Prestiz/Desvenlafaxine to treat hot flashes.
Currently, only hormonal products are FDA approved to treat menopausal hot flashes.
Are any natural supplements available for hot flashes and vaginal dryness?
I've mentioned the use of either vitamin E oil or olive oil for the vagina.
Black cohosh, in the form of remifemin, has been used to treat hot flashes/night sweats for up to 6 months.
Some women who eat soy foods convert soy protein into equol, a weak estrogen, and this may blunt their flashes.
However, we do NOT recommend taking high doses of soy pills/powders, only soy in the form of whole foods, as soy pill supplements have been linked to uterine stimulation.
In general, there is NO reason why a woman can not use Estring as it ONLY affects the vagina-it does NOT increase estrogen levels in the blood stream.
It is unfortunate that you are suffering with excess fear related to misinformation about estrogen.
In the book, I discuss how we even use the Estring vaginal ring in breast cancer survivors.
Vitamin E oil and olive oil are the only 2 oils that are fine to use as a 'natural' lubricant/moisturizer.
What causes a woman, as they age, to grow hair in places they never had hair before (i.e. chin and upper lip)?
Does taking and/or stopping different forms of birth control cause this?
When women go into menopause, their estrogen levels begin to drop, but the testosterone levels may not.
Therefore, they may develop chin whiskers, deepening of the voice and male-patterned hair thinning.
In younger women, birth control pills actually reduce testosterone levels which may improve hair and skin problems.
What is your response on getting enough Vitamin D, especially in areas of the country with limited sunshine?
Recent evidence has suggested that adequate levels of Vitamin D intake can reduce cancer incidence by 70% and increase longevity.
I recommend 1,000 IU of Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) daily.
It is very easy for your doctor to check your Vitamin D level with a 25-OH Vitamin D level.
Isn't there a screening test for ovarian cancer that can be done with the yearly exam similar to a man's PSA test for prostate cancer?
If there is, then why aren't doctors performing it routinely?
Is it an insurance issue?
This would be a great tool as many ovarian cancers are not detected early enough!
It is too bad that we do not yet have a simple blood test to screen for ovarian cancer.
Emails telling you to get your CA-125 test unfortunately are just a hoax.
In normal women, this is NOT a screen for ovarian cancer.
Many doctors will go ahead and order the test if you ask them rather than explain that a normal test does not exclude ovarian cancer AND an abnormal test does not diagnosis ovarian cancer.
An abnormal test result could actually lead to having your normal ovaries surgically removed.
I am 60 y/o recently dxd with dermoid cyst on the left ovary.
CA-120 marker is not elevated.
A total hysterectomy has been recommended.
What are the advantages/disadvantages over just having a lap and having the cyst removed?
If one is post-menopausal, is there any estrogen secretion going on in the ovaries?
In general, we like to preserve the ovaries up to age 65 yrs. because there continues to be hormone secretion.
However, if there is cancer it is best to have a complete hysterectomy.
It is important to find a surgeon that you feel comfortable with and will offer you all of your choices.
In young women, particularly under age 35, that have their ovaries removed without benefit of estrogen therapy, there is a higher risk of both heart disease and osteoporosis.
I am 60 years old.
Do medications and calcium supplements help prevent progression to osteoporosis?
Yes, but don't forget the 1,000 international units of Vitamin D3 daily.
Is joint pain tied to menopause?
Joint pain is NOT a classic menopausal symptom, although there are estrogen receptors on the cartilage and some postmenopausal women do report less stiffness on HT.
I recommend good nutrition, calcium, vitamin D (800 to 1,000 international units daily) and a sound exercise program after consulting with your doctor.
Weight loss, physical therapy and selected use of medicines and even joint injections may be needed for some women.
Glucosamine is a supplement that has been shown to decrease knee osteoarthritis symptoms in some postmenopausal women.
Is the progression to osteoporosis inevitable?
Ever since I've slipped into the menopausal abyss, I've packed on 10-15 lbs that will not go away despite diet and exercise.
Once I get to the other side of menopause will the added weight come off?
If I'm not having serious menopause symptoms I wouldn't want to start HT just for weight control.
Unfortunately, your metabolism takes a nose dive during menopause.
You actually have to eat less and exercise more just to prevent weight gain!
However, women on hormone therapy tend to be leaner than women not on hormone therapy BUT this is not a sole reason to take hormone therapy.
I would recommend daily exercise for one hour a day with weight lifting exercises.
You also may want to have your thyroid function tested.
I've recently heard that weight that is gained around the waist is very ‘active’ and produces estrogen.
Although I am in the process of losing weight, how does it factor into the doctor determining the correct amount of hormones one should take?
Too much body fat anywhere can by harmful.
The weight around the belly is linked to a higher rate of diabetes, cancer and heart disease, while weight around the hips and thighs is less harmful.
Too much body fat can increase hormone levels, although not always.
Women who are overweight have a higher risk of breast and uterine cancer.
What are the benefits of taking the omega 3 fatty acids and how much we need to take per day?
Omega 3 fatty acids are important for brain, breast, and heart health.
It is important to ingest at least 2 servings weekly (not daily).
Although I did not have PSC in mind when I requested the liver function tests, had they been run regularly, PSC would have been diagnosed significantly earlier.
Are there other companion diseases we should watch out for – and what battery of tests (and/or interview topics) should be covered on a regular basis to monitor both IBD progress, complications, and medications - as well as to screen for companion diseases?
I see that your daughter has UC and PSC.
Regarding companion diseases for UC and PSC there is a higher risk of colorectal cancer when associated with PSC.
Generally the advice is screening every 5 years for colorectal cancer.
An annual eye exam to watch iritis.
I also advise a baseline bone density to repeat every 2-3 yrs.
My daughter with UC has been in remission since shortly after her diagnosis 16 years ago, once we discovered her breakthrough diarrhea was triggered by poultry (which she was eating daily until we discovered she had a chicken allergy).
Unfortunately, remission has ended.
Her two most recent colonoscopies had visible inflammation and she is having symptoms as well.
We were lucky to find the trigger the first time – but identifying a food trigger that produces delayed symptoms using an elimination diet or standard allergy tests is about as effective as looking for a needle in a haystack.
I understand that the ELISA IgG test might be able to help cut the haystack down to size (high false positives, and poor reproducibility from lab to lab suggest it is no more than a starting point).
Ideas as to how to get college kid to track down a food trigger – including thoughts on using the ELISA IgG to start (where I might have it done, and what lab might be the most reliable)?
I agree that the diagnosis of food allergies may be very difficult.
The allergy that you are alluding to is typically a cell mediated allergy and there are no reliable tests for that.
My 3 and 1/2 year old son has been diagnosed with Crohn’s (he also has high functioning autism).
I always knew something wasn't right.
He barely eats and has never in 3 and 1/2 years had a solid BM.
Right now we are in the process of trying either Humira®  (adalimumab) or Remicade®  (infliximab).
None of the typical treatments have worked.
Our biggest challenge right now is trying to potty train him and get him to eat more.
His weight has stayed the same for over a year.
Any insight you can share would be helpful as we navigate this disease.
Autistic children are generally very sensitive to changes in bowel movement pattern.
I assume from the information you have provided, that your son likely has proctitis (inflammation of the rectum.)
This makes it very difficult to control bowel movements when he gets the urge.
He probably 'let's is go' when he starts to get pain given his underlying autistic disorder.
I have an 8 year old daughter that has Crohn's Disease.
I am wondering, is there any link to being exposed to asbestos and Crohn's Disease?
My daughter was attending a public school for about a year that was doing asbestos removal (unknown to the parents).
She began having problems and was then diagnosed with Crohn's Disease about 2 years later.
I have since pulled her out of that school and now home school her, but I always still wonder in the back of my mind if her being in that school during asbestos removal is what caused the onset of the disease for her.
Do you have any information about this?
Or is it really only a coincidence?
As far as I know there is no association between asbestos exposure and Crohn's disease.
My daughter is 7 diagnosed with IBD Crohn's and can't control her bowels what can I do?
She has accidents almost everyday and hides it from me.
I find it in her laundry.
What can I do to help her from embarrassment at school?
She is also experiencing a loss of urinary control.
Your daughter likely has active inflammation of the rectum.
When she has the urge to go to the bathroom, she cannot hold back or she would have had an accident before she has the opportunity to control her sphincter muscle before she hits the toilet.
Is someone with Ulcerative Colitis at greater risk for other autoimmune diseases?
There is a higher incidence of rheumatologic disorders; high risk for liver disease especially primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC)and there may be a slightly higher risk of eye disorders such as iritis (uveitis).
If a child is diagnosed at an early age (5 years old) with Early Ulcerative Colitis/Proctitis, what is the likelihood that the disease will get worse as the child ages?
What is the prognosis?
How likely is it that the disease could remain confined to the rectum?
There is a 60% chance of disease progression to involve the rest of the colon.
Hence the disease would stay in the rectum 25-40% of the time.
Ifsomeone has Ulcerative Colitis, are they likely to also get Crohn's disease?
However, up to 20% of patients with Crohn's disease have isolated colon involvement.
This means that it can masquerade as UC.
This situation can be confusing to the practitioner and the clinical course will only be known as the disease progresses.
Are there long term side effects of using Canasa?
It is the inconvenience that is the problem.
My child has been diagnosed with ulcerative colitis and is on Prednisone and Imuran.
She can not tolerate the Apriso class of drugs.
Are there other options?
Depending on her age and the area of the bowel involved, she could try Asacol or Pentesa or Colazol.
Also, child with ulcerative colitis is G-tube fed Peptamen Jr, is that an appropriate formula for her? are there dietary changes that might help?
There is no role for hydrolysate formula like Peptamen®  in IBD.
The only dietary regimen that may work is elemental diet.
The one that has been tried is Modulin.
The efficacy goes away once the normal diet is re-introduced.
She should be on a age appropriate formula for the medical reason to start Peptamen® .
The help of a dietician would be worthwhile.
My child, age 12, with UC, has abnormal liver function tests.
They looked for PSC, but it was not found on initial MRCP.
They now want to do ERCP and possible liver biopsy.
While I know PCS is common with UC, what other possible causes should be ruled out regarding liver labs?
The physician has to help the family make the decision whether the risk of the ERCP outweighs the benefit of diagnosing PSC.
If your daughter has elevated liver enzymes and GGT (another liver enzyme that comes form the bile duct) then PSC would be in my thought process.
However, inflammatory bowel disease patients can have abnormal liver tests when they have active GI inflammation secondary to medications and infections.
(Her only medication, for the UC aside from a brief period of prednisolone, is mesalamine)?
It is a combination of both disease and treatment.
Treatments like steroids will reduce bone density.
Active disease and liver disease may also decrease bone density.
My daughter has been asymptomatic, feeling good since the test, feeling good eating gained the 6 pounds back.
This most likely is a post viral mild gastritis.
The joint symptoms are most likely a post influenza phenomenon.
If she is doing well now, I would suggest no further testing.
Is there a specific test to easily diagnosis Crohn’s or ulcerative colitis?
Diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease is made by combination of the symptoms of the patient (disease presentation), abnormal examination, abnormal blood tests, radiological tests (barium, CT scans, etc.) and endoscopy.
The nodules are likely enlarged lymph follicles (like lymph glands in your neck.)
It is sometimes normal for young children to have enlarged lymph follicles (Peyer's Patches.)
Since your daughter is doing well, I would advice you not to pursue it any further.
What nutritional shake would you recommend for a diverticulitis fistula patient?
There is no specific diet for this setting.
Do you foresee a cure for Ulcerative Colitis?
Inflammatory bowel disease is a disorder of interaction between normal gut bacteria and the GI immune system.
About 70 different genes are now associated with IBD.
Having an abnormal gene increases your risk to develop IBD however it is not an all or non phenomena.
It does not make you certain to develop the disease.
There is some hope in the horizon that embryonic stem cell therapy may cure the disease for good.
Do you recommend any alternatives such as Probiotics, Fish Oils, Aloe Vera for treating UC?
The may have an adjunctive effect but not an absolute effect.
And also, we have seen unexpected side effects and toxicities from these agents.
Since the topic of PSC has come from other parents, as well, are you familiar with the long term use of oral vancomycin in the treatment of PSC in pediatric patients (Drs Davies & Cox) , which also seems to have some impact on some cases of coexistent IBD?
I am not sure that once the disease process in PSC is activated it can be reversed.
It is possible that vancomycin may slow it down - but this is my pure hypothetical view point.
More results should be awaited.
I would like to thank all the participants for the interest shown today.
We are well equipped to treat IBD in children using state of the art investigations and therapies in a child-friendly way.
The older I get the harder it is to lose or even maintain my weight, what can I do?
I have hit a plateau with my weight loss - but I still need to take off at least 20 lbs.
I am eating right, exercising etc.
How can I get jump started again?
I am getting discouraged Don't get discouraged!
Plateaus mean we need to tweak something else.
Usually it is carb consumption at the wrong time or hidden sugars in your food.
Carbs are best consumed by noon as we slow down the rate at which we consume them as the day progresses.
True for every human alive.
I am menopausal and my waist line is thickening.
It is harder to lose weight especially when I crave nothing but sweets.
I am staying away from them and eating healthy - but why at this age is it so much harder?
Our metabolism simply slows down!
Removing simple carbs from the diet removes the craving.
See South Beach- he has a good program to help overcome the cravings. (no ties) It seems really hard losing weight since menopause.
Menopause is a time of slowing of our metabolism, both for reasons related to hormones and also aging.
The best approach is to anticipate that you too will be a victim of this slowing metabolism and start a solid balanced exercise program, such as walking 45 -60 minutes daily and strength training 1 or 2 days a week.
Is it true that women gain weight after a hysterectomy?
Does is matter whether or not you take hormone replacement therapy (HRT)?
Only if the ovaries are removed at the same time, as you become postmenopausal instantly and your metabolism starts to slow down.
Anticipate this and work out and mind the caloric intake and you can avoid it!
My extra weight is mostly in my stomach.
How can you focus weight loss to that area?
Normally when I diet I lose weight in my chest and butt.
I don't want to lose weight there!
Well, you must be an apple-shaped person!
We struggle with this and we are at higher risk than out friends the pear shaped women for heart disease and diabetes.
So carbohydrate timing is important.
Don't omit them as we need them, but load up early in the day, prior to noon, combined with caloric restrictions and exercise.
This is an excellent way to "have your cake and eat it too" Must keep track of pinching that area regularly to monitor, as it always wants to come back.
You will have to exercise regularly for the rest of your life.
My physician told me to lose weight for health reasons (diabetes, cholesterol) - but did not tell me how to get started.
Depending on your age, get medical clearance first.
Go to programs and websites about those diseases you are trying to avoid.
Understanding how they happen in the first place helps to empower you to take control.
Knowing what the consequences of untreated disease are also helps.
In addition, use a phone app that helps to keep you on track as you are on the road, at a restaurant, etc. as you can keep track of what you eat, consult about a particular food or restaurant choice for calories etc.
Support is key! you can't do it alone unless you are highly motivated and have a good support group.
Get a partner so the days you don't want to exercise you can push each other.
Having a date to exercise is harder to break if you know someone else is depending on you.
Why would I be told to lose weight before I have surgery?
First of all, never take this personally.
Your surgeon is interested in your welfare and your quick recovery after surgery. Overall you will be at lower risk!!
Lower risk of postoperative infections, wound complications, forming blood clots in the legs- which we can break off from the legs and send to the lungs resulting in a life threatening condition known as pulmonary embolism.
In addition the better visualization at the time of surgery results in less risk of complications during the procedure.
In addition, less anesthesia complications!
How does being overweight affect one’s ability to become pregnant?
We make estrogen in our fatty tissue which shuts off your body's ability to develop eggs in the ovary in a normal fashion.
Weight loss helps this mechanism to return to normal and voila!
We can help with drugs too but why not try it the natural way!
I had lost 70 lbs nine years ago eating bite sized candy bars all day long.
I kept the weight off for seven years and only two years ago during a highly stressful period gained 40lbs.
I eat 80% healthier than ever, workout daily, lift weights several times a week and cannot lose a lb.
I believe I have created a insulin resistant body and would like to know what recommendations you would have.
See an endocrinologist, and it is time to reassess your current dietary and exercise routines.
You just need a kick start to get you over a hump.
Medical management can help here.
What is the protocol for treating insulin resistance and PCOS?
Well, you should definitely check with an endocrinologist for this one.
Medications are available that help decrease insulin resistance.
But other things that will help are "weight loss and exercise."
While walking for exercise, I injured my heel and Achilles tendon and my doctor says I have to be in an Aircast for 4 weeks and no exercise.
How can you even try to lose weight, let alone maintain any weight loss with an injury that has you sidelined?
Well, this takes masterful control, but we are women and good at that when we want to be.
Think about that dress that costs ????, You don't have the money now but you will get that dress won't you?
Just really pare down on what you eat.
Minimize animal protein and use more vegetable protein as they tend to have less hidden fats, and decrease your overall caloric consumption but not so low as to slow down your metabolic rate.
You may also add a very strong upper body weight routine to maintain muscle mass.
We can sit and lift weights and use machines.
Be patient, once the cast is off you will be instructed on what exercises to incorporate as you rehabilitate that injured muscle group and you will be on task again.
You still have some control!
I am on disability and can't walk for a long time.
Are there any exercises you can recommend for someone with a disability?
Depends on the disability.
Strength training comes to mind, but I would visit the gym , local YWCA or consult with an exercise guru to personalize it to your own disability to prevent further injury.
I would like to lose over 100 lbs.
What would be a safe amount of weight to loss weekly?
Well, in my experience, the patients who have this much weight to lose will do well with some form of partnering and/or medical management.
What foods do you recommend to be filling, low in calories and nutritious?
Oh those vegetables – fibrous: brussel sprouts, cabbage, sweet peppers, romaine lettuce, onions, radishes, beets.
Eat veggies with every meal and yes have all veggie days weekly.
Limit the number of fruits per day to 2 - 1 in the morning 1 hour after breakfast and 1 hour after lunch.
Make it a hard chew: apple, pear etc.
Stay away from high sugar fruits like mandarin oranges, grapes, cherries, watermelon etc. as we tend to over eat them.
What other factors might you contribute to a person averaging eating 1300 calories per day that weighs in excess of 350#?
Just not consuming enough calories, you will be starving at this low caloric intake and then you will overeat at the next meal.
Also, how much fiber is in those 1300 calories?
The more the better!
It seems like I am puffy - water weight.
Does 'water weight' really make a difference and how can I get it off without medications.
Water weight typically happens just before our period and is related to one of the hormones we make that cause us to retain.
Consuming high sugar and high sodium foods also make us retain. Limiting sodium intake and switching to birth control pills to turn off those hormones are the only 2 things I know that helps.
Many of my patients gain up to 5 lbs per month during this part of the cycle and plateau on weight loss programs during this week of the month.
Knowing it will happen can help you keep your mind focused so you don't cheat if you perceive you are failing on your weight loss program.
It usually resolves after the cycle.
If it persists after, check with your doctor to see if any medical condition is contributing to this persistent water weight gain.
If you are menopausal and your sodium intake is ok please check with your doctor to make sure no other medical condition exists.
When a person loses weight fast, someone always says - 'Oh, that's just water weight.'
What exactly does this mean and is this true?
Initially, when you first limit your calories, we tend to see most of the weight we lose is related to water weight just by cutting back.
When you start exercising, this slows down and you may tend to even plateau or gain weight as you breakdown fat and build muscle.
Is there any merit to periodic fasting – say once a week?
Well, current data suggest that frugal caloric intake is better for us.
I am struggling with this one as I like to eat.
Does Acai help with weight loss?
However, if I thought it did, I would quit my job and go to every mall in America and every street corner and sell it.
I would even wait outside Doctors offices and sell it to all their patients.
What about the colonic cleanses that I see advertised.
Are they helpful in losing weight?
Colonic cleansing is not a way to lose weight.
It is good for preop bowel preparations and colonoscopies!
