However, doses the rats received were three to 60 times more potent than that being used currently to treat humans.
I had surgery to remove a parathyroid adenoma in January and now have normal calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH).
Does the previous adenoma disqualify me from taking Forteo®  (teriparatide)?
Technically, if your PTH and calcium levels truly remain normal for extended periods of time, then you might qualify.
However, two considerations come to mind.
First, your bone density might come up significantly having treated the cause of the osteoporosis and low bone density—the hyperparathyroidism—and you may not need medication at this point.
Secondly, sometimes parathyroid levels may increase again later on, and thus it would likely be avoided.
If someone has a family history of multiple myeloma, and bone and cartilage cancers, wouldn't Forteo®  (teriparatide) be contraindicated?
Teriparatide is not recommended for use in patients with bone cancer or those at higher risk for bone cancer, such as a history of Paget disease.
I was on Fosamax®  (alendronate) for 13 years.
I went off of it two years ago, and now I am only taking Evista®  (raloxifene).
I did not get worse in the 15 years.
Now I am on Forteo®  (teriparatide).
Can a person go back to or Evista®  after Forteo® ?
Technically, you could return to any antiresorptive medication after taking Forteo® .
It is important to follow therapy with Forteo®  with an antiresorptive, or you will likely lose the gains in your bone density from that treatment in the years after you stop it.
However, Evista®  has been found to be effective mainly at the spine and not to work as well at the hip.
So if you have a low bone density in your hips, then it may not be the best medication.
What is your advice about the sequence of taking Forteo®  (teriparatide) for three months followed by Prolia®  (denosumab) and returning to Forteo®  for another three months followed by another Prolia®  injection to prevent the typical bone density loss when Forteo®  is ended?
I would recommend taking Forteo®  for two years followed by Prolia® .
Taking Prolia®  following Forteo®  should help prevent bone loss upon completion of Forteo® .
Prolia®  also helps build bone after two to three years of use and right now is being used indefinitely.
Background: I am a 60-year-old woman diagnosed with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis at the age of 13 years old.
I have been on methotrexate and Synthroid®  (levothyroxine) for years, and currently take Humira® , but no steroid usage.
I was recently diagnosed with osteoporosis.
I suffered 15 percent breakage of L1 about three years ago from a bad fall.
In 2009 a front tooth broke and when I was getting an implant, bone resorption was noted.
I have slightly elevated IgG but my calcium level is fine.
With each doctor I get a different recommendation.
Who should I trust, and who is the real expert?
I started with a bisphosphonate when I reminded my rheumatologist of upper palate bone resorption and swallowing issues.
With my gynecologist it was estrogen.
I reminded him that my sister had estrogen-dependent breast cancer.
With my endocrinologist it was Forteo®  (teriparatide), but all my other doctors said not to use it as my osteoporosis was early stage.
Now my new rheumatologist recommends Prolia®  (denosumab).
Plus, how does one know about side effects of combined drugs.
Can Humira®  cause additional risks?
What about methotrexate or Synthroid® ?
Does calcium affect the heart?
Based on the available information, I favor treatment with Prolia® .
There is theoretical concern about an increased infection risk with a combination of Prolia®  and Humira® .
Methotrexate does not increase the risk of osteoporosis.
Synthroid®  is fine as long as dosage is appropriate and not too high.
Excessive calcium intake can increase cardiovascular risk.
The recommendation is for a calcium intake of 1,200 to 1,500 mg daily between diet and supplements.
Is it better to get intravenous (IV) bisphosphonates rather than pills?
That depends on a number of factors.
Certainly, pills are much less expensive and thus more readily available than IV forms.
Many of the bisphosphonate (BPS) pills can be taken at extended intervals, i.e. once a week and some once a month, to make them more convenient.
There is also a once a year IV form that is considered more convenient by some, but some patients prefer the idea of taking a pill than getting something intravenously.
BPS pills are unfortunately poorly absorbed, with less than one percent per dose, which is why they require patients to take them on a completely empty stomach with nothing else than water.
Additionally, IV forms may be better for patients with relative contraindications to oral forms, such as esophagus or stomach ulcers, strictures, etc.
Do you trust generic medication to treat bone loss?
Generic medications such as Fosamax®  (alendronate) and Boniva®  are both effective in treatment of bone loss in the form of low bone mass or osteoporosis.
I generally prescribe generic medications as these are the ones that most all insurance plans cover and are most affordable thus accessible for patients.
Most do work, although generics only have to be as effective or equivalent to brand names by a percentage, which is not 100 percent.
Thus, I personally start with generic medications most times.
If a patient does not seem to be responding appropriately, I would either consider an alternative form (i.e., intravenous vs. oral), a different brand or using the brand name.
I am a 38-year-old female with a strong family history of osteoporosis that at least dates back to my great-grandmother.
I have rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and fibromyalgia as well, but have not entered menopause yet.
I have only had one short course of prednisone in my life.
All females in my family have had multiple fractures.
My mom broke her hip when she was 64 years old and had full-blown osteoporosis at 50 years old.
I do all the right things in terms of working out, vitamins, and diet.
I already have degenerative conditions noted in my back with two herniated discs and in my hips.
My gynecologist indicates that insurance will not pay for a bone density before the age of 50 years old, even with known risk factors.
It is great that you're being proactive.
Unfortunately, rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory condition that in and of itself increases the risk for osteoporosis outside of the prednisone that is often used to treat it as well.
Minimizing other risk factors, such as not smoking, doing weight-bearing exercise, and minimizing alcohol, as you are already doing, may be some prevention you can do.
Adding activities that maximize your balance to minimize falls will become increasingly important as you age.
So, staying physically active as you get older despite your medical conditions will be critical.
Remember, thankfully not everyone who has osteoporosis breaks a bone, which is the end result that we really care about related to osteoporosis.
If genetics trumps your prevention efforts, it does not necessarily mean that you will suffer the consequences of osteoporosis, i.e. fracture.
Insurance may well cover a bone density premenopausally if you have RA.
However, sometimes the results can be challenging to interpret at this time.
You may also consider hormone therapy if appropriate upon menopause transition to help prevent bone loss typical with menopause.
Also, be careful not to take too much calcium in the form of supplements.
Eating a calcium-rich diet is likely the best option.
Taking vitamin D supplements is likely a good idea as it is not found readily in most foods.
I am a 20-year-old male with a complex health history.
I was diagnosed with osteoporosis after being on hydrocortisone for 20 months.
I was misdiagnosed with secondary adrenal insufficiency.
I have been off hydrocortisone since August 2012, but my latest DEXA (dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry) scan in September 2013 showed no improvement.
I have suffered two back injuries since September 2012 that have been attributed to my bone health.
I am on 1,000 mg of calcium and 5,000 IU of vitamin D. I am exercising with weights and doing “cardio” (aerobic) exercises.
What more can I do to improve my bone health?
When should I expect improvement?
What is the most important thing I can be doing to help my bones?
It sounds as though you have been through a lot at such a young age.
Your desire to be proactive is wonderful!
It sounds as though you are doing a lot already to help improve your bone health.
Bone density is not the whole contributor to breaks, so don't get too discouraged if you have not yet seen changes in bone density.
Also, stability of density can be interpreted as treatment success at times too.
Not smoking and minimizing alcohol to no more than one to two drinks per day are also other things you can do.
You might consider seeing a physical therapist who specializes in osteoporosis to ensure that you are doing exercises and activities that will not harm your spine and bones, as some may need to be modified if you have had back issues in the past related to osteoporosis.
They can give you a modification of your home program that ensures you can continue to be active, but in a safe way.
Also, it sounds as though you should be following with a bone specialist who knows the details of your medical history and can provide more tailored recommendations for you through the years.
How can a male prevent osteoporosis?
Some articles say calcium supplements may increase heart attack risks, and milk may increase the risks of prostate cancer for males.
My husband is over 60 years old.
He only takes vitamin D3 400 IU daily now.
He feels intermittent mild back pain.
His doctor said men have a lower risk than women for the development of osteoporosis.
Would you recommend a calcium supplement to men over the age of 60 years old?
Would 600 mg of daily calcium supplement cause coronary artery or aorta calcification?
How does one balance the benefits and risks?
I applaud you for thinking about how to prevent osteoporosis in men, something we all often forget about!
Men can get osteoporosis too and suffer similar consequences.
In fact, men who break their hip die more frequently in the year following the break.
The recommendation for calcium sufficiency in men is 1000 mg/day total, meaning total calcium taken in from one's diet and supplements.
There is not definitive data to prove that calcium supplements cause heart disease or strokes.
I recommend searching the many online calcium calculators that are available to assess how much calcium is in your husband's current diet and seeing if you can make up the difference by eating more calcium-rich foods.
Are there any treatments or suggestions to help avoid deformities from osteoporosis?
Deformities related to osteoporosis come from fractures, like the dowager's hump (hyperkyphosis) or stooped over stature that can result from vertebral (spine) fractures.
Recall that osteoporosis is a completely different condition than osteoarthritis and other forms of inflammatory arthritis like rheumatoid arthritis, which can cause joint destruction and related deformities.
All of the treatments we have discussed today would apply.
I had bilateral joint replacements done when I was 40 years old.
I am now 59 years old and have had both hips revised.
How can I maximize the strength of my femurs in order to keep my femoral stems intact?
I recommend getting a bone density test to assess bone mass to determine the strength of your bones to see if treatment is needed for low bone mass or osteoporosis.
Otherwise exercise to maintain strength and conditioning of your leg muscles would also be beneficial.
Additionally, getting enough calcium in the diet and maintaining adequate vitamin D levels are also important.
If someone has celiac disease from childhood, which led to lower bone density from the beginning, how might one improve bone health?
Would better nutrient absorption be too late?
If absorption is an issue, improving nutrient absorption at any time is always better than having poor absorption.
Maintaining adequate calcium and vitamin D intake (including taking in higher amounts to make sure that enough is absorbed as long as there are no side effects) and exercise play even bigger roles.
You also need to make sure that no other medical conditions are contributing to low bone mass.
Obviously, if bone mass is low enough, treatment is indicated.
I am a 56-year-old post-menopausal female.
I used to take a calcium supplement 550 mg and drink milk daily.
I stopped calcium two years ago because of calcification in my coronary artery and aorta.
In addition, I read articles which said calcium may increase heart attack risks in women.
I only drink and can tolerate skim milk now and take vitamin D3 400IU/day.
My recent bone density shows femur average 0.928 g/cm2 (0.3 in same age group), and L1-L4 0.961 g/cm2 (-0.3 in same age group).
Occasionally I have mild back pain.
Should I resume calcium supplement and dosage?
How do I balance the risks to my heart and benefits to osteoporosis in using a calcium supplement?
The recommendation for calcium intake is between 1,200 to 1,500 mg daily for bone health without increasing cardiovascular risk in terms of dietary and supplement sources combined.
This means that between what you get in your diet and in the form of supplements should add up to 1,200 to 1,500 mg daily.
How much calcium is too much calcium?
If you are eating greens daily, is a supplement necessary?
The recommendation for calcium is 1,200 to 1,500 mg daily between diet and supplements.
Eating enough greens such as collard greens, spinach and broccoli may get you enough calcium if you eat enough.
One cup of each of the greens mentioned is equivalent to 300 mg of calcium.
I have been on low-dose prednisone for many years to keep systemic lupus erythematosus in remission.
Other than a dip at menopause, my bone density is stable.
The treatments I had gave me side effects.
Is Citracal®  Maximum 630 mg with vitamin D 500 IU contraindicated for someone with kidney stones recently discovered upon checking a cyst in the kidney?
Taking Citracal®  is not contraindicated for kidney stones unless there is too much calcium being excreted through the kidneys.
This can be assessed based on a 24-hour urine test for calcium excretion.
If there is too much calcium excretion, calcium supplements would be contraindicated.
What is the difference between liquid calcium and calcium tablets?
Does one absorb better?
Is one better for the stomach?
Liquid calcium is probably easier to take than calcium tablets for someone with difficulties swallowing.
Calcium in the form of calcium citrate is better absorbed than in the form of calcium carbonate regardless of whether liquid or tablet form.
Calcium citrate is also easier to absorb for those patients with stomach issues such as reflux or ulcers, and for those who are on medications such as Prilosec®  and the like to treat those conditions.
Does drinking a lot of tea contribute to bone loss?
In general, for other health reasons, limiting any caffeinated beverage to two cups or less a day may be optimal.
Is there any difference in the quality of calcium in dairy products (e.g., milk, yogurt, cheese, etc.) versus plant-based foods (e.g., broccoli, kale, soy/almond milk, etc.)?
At this point in time, I do not routinely make a differentiation between recommending calcium from dairy sources versus calcium from plant sources.
Often times other medical conditions that a person is being treated for dictates which calcium source is better.
For example, someone being treated for high cholesterol should not eat excessive cheese because this may increase cholesterol, so plant-based sources of calcium may be better in this type of patient.
What are the benefits of a gluten-free diet in terms of osteoporosis?
As far as I am aware of, there is no specific benefit to a gluten-free diet in terms of osteoporosis.
Are there nutritional supplements that can help increase bone density?
Also, providing adequate vitamin D intake based on vitamin D level on blood test.
No other nutritional supplements have been tested in a rigorous enough manner to warrant recommendation as routine care for increasing bone density.
What is the recommended dose of vitamin D?
The Institute of Medicine has recommended a daily allowance of 800 IU daily for the generic general population.
However, that amount was studied to get a majority of people to a low normal level of vitamin D—lower than what many healthcare providers believe is in a sufficient range.
Vitamin D absorption and sufficiency is impacted by a number of factors, including advancing age, darker pigmentation, lack of sun exposure, and obesity all lowering levels and many people who fall into these categories need supplements.
I advocate for monitoring blood levels of vitamin D, at least periodically, in patients who have osteoporosis and/or are on /were on osteoporosis medications.
I use almond milk on my cereal (which is wheat based).
Recently I read that wheat may alter the intake of calcium in the body, if the two are combined together.
Is this true, and are there other situations, combinations of foods or other medications that would prevent proper calcium intake?
I am not aware that combination of wheat and calcium taken together would impact the absorption of calcium.
The most common medications that impact the absorption of calcium are the proton pump inhibitors such as Prilosec®  (omeprazole), Prevacid®  (lansoprazole) and Nexium®  (esomeprazole) that reduce amount of acidity in the stomach.
Is calcium from algae effective?
Calcium from any source including algae can be effective in terms of calcium supplement.
I am considering strontium citrate and would like to know if its side effects outweigh its bone building benefits.
A medication called strontium renelate is available for use in Europe for treatment of osteoporosis.
Therefore it is not possible to comment whether it has bone-building benefits that outweigh its side effects.
Also need to keep in mind that although strontium may increase bone density, it does not necessarily mean a reduction in the risk of fracture which is the goal of treatment.
I always hear that thinner women are more at risk for osteoporosis.
I could stand to take off 20 to 30 pounds.
Will my weight reduction increase bone density loss?
It is true that having a long-term low body weight can increase the risk of osteoporosis.
Additionally, as there are numerous other health reasons and conditions that can be improved/prevented from maintaining a healthy body weight, I advocate for the latter.
In the end, it is about our overall health, quality of life and longevity.
Can you provide a more complex understanding of weight-bearing exercise?
I understand how walking might help feet and leg bones and hips, but for wrists would push ups be more appropriate?
Does stretching movements that pull on sections of bone benefit bone health?
Bone density in the bones on one’s dominant side is usually higher than the non-dominant side.
Weight-bearing exercise includes anything in which your skeleton is supporting your weight.
Weight-bearing stimulates positive bone turnover.
Scientists first discovered this when astronauts rapidly lost bone density when they traveled into space.
I have heard that jumping up and down for a few minutes several times a week helped to increase bone density.
Is there any evidence to prove this works?
Any activity where a person is supporting their own body weight i.e. standing, walking, jumping up and down helps to increase bone density.
However, if bone density is not normal, jumping up and down may lead to compression fractures of the spine.
Usually this form of exercise is not the primary or only method recommended to maintain or increase bone density.
I take calcium with vitamin D. I have been off Actonel®  (risedronate sodium) for two years.
I took it and Fosamax®  (alendronate) for a total of 10 years).
I do elliptical or treadmill six days a week.
If I am in good shape and do jumping exercises landing softly on a mat, would that be okay?
Would it strengthen my bones?
Weight-bearing exercises on the elliptical or treadmill is preferred to jumping exercises.
Sometimes the pressure on the spine from jumping exercises can lead to compression fractures.
You also need to make sure that your bone mass is remaining stable off Actonel® .
Since you have already been on treatment for 10 years, drug holiday is warranted if bone density shows stable bone mass and no interval history of fractures while on treatment and since off treatment.
What new osteoporosis medications appear to be the most hopeful and when do you think they will be available to patients?
What about romosozumab, cathepsin K inhibitors, and glucagon-like peptide 2?
There are several potentially up and coming new therapies in the pipeline for osteoporosis.
In fact, there have been more new medications for osteoporosis in the last decade then there were in the prior two decades.
I do not think that any of these new ones are in the final FDA approval stages though.
Therefore, currently it is not being used as a treatment for osteoporosis.
In looking at what is available in terms of treatment, I see four areas: antiresorptive drugs, anabolic-increase drug, proper calcium and vitamins D and K (nutritionals) or weight-oriented exercise.
I would not necessarily see these as four separate areas, as ensuring calcium and D sufficiency and weight-bearing exercises are critical to treatment, regardless of which bone specific agent is also used.
The one I believe that is closest to market is another anabolic agent that works through a different mechanism than the only other currently available drug in the United States (i.e., teriparatide).
Please comment about the effect of rebounding and also vibration plates to help bone density.
This brings me to my notion that weight-bearing exercise is good for bones, but some exercises may be better than others.
Jumping exercises involve higher rhythmic impact to our bones vs. simply walking.
Additional resources can be found through the National Osteoporosis Foundation.
There are very few if any long-term medical implications of scoliosis in adults.
It had been thought that large curves may lead to restrictive lung disease and potentially heart problems, but this has not been shown to be the case for the vast majority of idiopathic scoliosis patients.
It is very rare for idiopathic curves to progress above 80° or 85° and, in general, these curves do not produce significant medical effects.
Similarly, scoliosis does not lead to "displacement of the internal organs", which has been claimed in the past.
Over the long-term, people with scoliosis may develop degenerative change in the curve, particularly in the lumbar curves, which may lead to symptoms requiring treatment in adulthood.
At age 80 I found out I have scoliosis.
What should I be doing or not doing at this age?
Scoliosis can result from asymmetric degeneration of the spine leading to a curve.
As far as doing; remain as active as possible to keep the muscles that support your spine strong and the lower limb muscles flexible.
This is best done initially through a physical therapist after an evaluation by your physician.
Try to avoid sitting for long periods, and make sure your bone density is tested regularly by your physician.
Our 20-year-old daughter has been diagnosed with scoliosis.
In her annual check-ups these past 19 years, she was asked to bend at the waist and was never flagged.
Now a sports doctor has found it.
She's a runner (35 miles per week while in college).
What's our next step?
She's been seeing a physical therapist for hip soreness from lack of stretching her hamstrings.
One of the most important things to know is the degree of scoliosis.
I assume the sports doctor found it as a result of performing an x-ray.
She has finished growing at this point and if the curve is minimal, the only treatment may be periodic observation.
Tight hamstrings are common in distance runners and may have no relation to scoliosis.
All I am offered is a yearly x-ray to check the degree of my thoracolumbar curve.
Is there nothing else (besides core building exercises) I can do to help myself?
I am a 71-year-old female.
The exercises are very important.
Maintaining bone health by regular bone density testing and supplementation/medication based upon the degree of bone mineralization is important as well.
If idiopathic scoliosis, by definition, means that the vertebrae are unaffected and intact, that means that the cause must be in the soft tissue.
We keep hearing there is “no evidence.”
Patients who have idiopathic scoliosis actually undergo morphologic changes to their vertebrae.
The underlying cause for developing idiopathic scoliosis is still unknown.
Most postulate that it is a multifactorial process involving gross asymmetry of the vertebral column, a subtle neuromuscular imbalance that is triggered in adolescence.
I have had scoliosis since I was a teenager.
I wore a back brace for four years in high school, which did stop the progression of the curve, but have not had surgery on my spine due to having severe pulmonary hypertension.
I do not feel as if my scoliosis has worsened, but I have not seen a doctor for it since having the brace.
How can I tell if it's getting any worse?
Are there options for someone like me who can't have major surgery?
In adults, the indication is for treatment of symptoms not the magnitude or progression of the curve.
If you do not feel that your scoliosis is significantly limiting your activity, there is no need for any treatment.
It would be reasonable, however, to see a specialist in adult spinal deformity in order to establish a relationship with someone and have your curve checked intermittently.
I understand exercise is very important, particularly for adults with scoliosis and possibly severely limited lung capacity.
How do folks exercise if they need oxygen to do that?
I wouldn't think gyms would welcome people bringing oxygen, and if they need oxygen, they may not be strong enough to walk outside or at a mall and carry the oxygen or oxygen concentrator.
Can you please give some tips?
In general, loss of pulmonary function is NOT the result of the scoliosis.
In the past, it was thought that idiopathic scoliosis could progress to the point where it caused severe restrictions of the lungs, but this has not proven to be the case.
In patients with neurologic causes for their scoliosis or scoliosis developing very early in life (< eight years old), this may be true, but it is actually very rare.
For patients with underlying lung disease requiring oxygen who need to exercise, a good resource is to speak to someone from the American Lung Society and see what resources are available in your area.
I am fearful of exercise since my first episode of scoliosis-related pain occurred after I spent time working out with a personal trainer.
I have recently completed a series of physical therapy visits.
These visits focused on low-level core strengthening and stretching.
I would like to progress, but don't know where to turn for guidance.
Ideally, your therapist advanced you to a program that you can do on your own.
At this point, you should be able to perform those exercises and can advance as tolerated to more advanced exercises.
Yoga and Pilates are good choices of exercises for you.
What can I do to help my scoliosis that's not invasive?
My physical therapist taught me to do side planks on my weak side.
While it does strengthen my weak side, my muscle on the scoliosis side is still hard as a rock.
I agree with your therapist.
The scoliosis side will feel hard since the curve pushes the muscles outward, making them easier to feel and there is likely spasm contributing to this.
Side planks and prone planks are great exercises to condition your core muscles.
Also, pay attention to keeping your lower limb muscles flexible, as they control the movement of the pelvis.
I get injections periodically from a pain management doctor.
I am pain free for several weeks after the injection.
Is there any other therapy besides injections?
Will physical therapy help?
I am a huge proponent of physical therapy.
I do injections either for diagnosis or as an adjunct to therapy.
Injections as sole therapy tend to be very short lived.
A course of PT and, most important, a regular exercise program after completing PT can do an excellent job of treating your pain.
Does scoliosis in adults affect hip and knee function?
Does scoliosis make you more prone to falls and what can you do?
What kinds of exercises are helpful for scoliosis?
Scoliosis can affect function in the limbs due to the fact that the joints all work in conjunction as part of the kinetic chain.
Anything that affects balance can make you more prone to falls.
The best kind of exercises are those that condition the core muscles of the low back, abdomen, flanks, diaphragm and pelvic floor, as well as those that stretch and increase flexibility of the hip girdle muscles of the lower limbs.
The diminished lung capacity is secondary to the scoliosis that was identified at age six.
Surgery resulted in fusion of 11 vertebrae.
Given that information, do you have any tips as to exercise for someone who only uses oxygen for exercise?
I don't believe most gyms would welcome someone using oxygen.
It is hard to walk outside or at a mall when carrying oxygen, as the oxygen is heavy for me.
If you were to contact a local pulmonologist, he or she would be able to tell you about any respiratory rehabilitation programs in your area.
The pulmonologist would have the best idea as to what programs are available locally.
Is there any advantage to exercise in a swimming pool over the yoga and Pilates that you have mentioned?
The benefit to exercising in a pool is the fact that buoyancy helps facilitate movement.
At present, I have severe left sciatic pain.
X-ray shows moderate to severe narrowing of all lumbar disc spaces and a curvature of the dorsolumbar spine to the right with an angle measured between D10 and L3 being 27 degrees.
I have had prior (2009) spinal fusion (L4-5) to correct left sciatic stenosis.
If surgery is indicated to correct my sciatic pain, would it be advisable at the same time to surgically intervene to correct, or at the least stabilize, my scoliosis.?p The decision to correct and stabilize a scoliosis is multifactorial.
The magnitude of the curve does not dictate whether surgery should be performed.
To a spinal surgeon, balanced means that in the standing position the head is clearly over the pelvis and the hips are in both the front to back and side planes.
In someone who is balanced, it may be possible to treat only symptomatic or unstable levels and follow the scoliosis.
If someone is out of balance, then addressing the deformity is required in order to treat the symptoms and prevent progression.
For a child with idiopathic scoliosis, what are the criteria for determining when surgery is necessary?
Is the decision based on the curvature or his functional/physiological issues?
The indication for surgery is based on the curve magnitude as well as the child's skeletal maturity.
Curves that reach 45° to 50° are best treated with surgery, as they are extremely likely to progress throughout adulthood.
Younger children with curves that reach 40° are also candidates for surgical intervention.
The decision is largely based on the magnitude of the curvature and the patient's growth remaining and not so much on the patient's functional or physiological issues.
If there are no breathing or organ constraints and no pain (possible discomfort from time to time, but no pain), are there other reasons to rush into corrective surgery on a young lady?
(Background information: 12 years of age, only one or two mild menstrual events in past six to 12 months, Risser growth shows not quite full maturity but almost.)
The decision to move toward surgical intervention on this child should be based on the magnitude of the curve (number of degrees), as well as the patient's growth remaining.
The magnitude of her curve is not listed here but if it reaches 45° to 50°, then surgery would be indicated.
It sounds like, based on the information you have provided, that she is within one to two years of the end of spine growth.
There is almost never a rush to proceed with surgery as the procedure is essentially the same for patients who wait a few months or years.
The risk is continued progression of the curvature if surgical intervention is delayed significantly.
If surgery is indicated, however, it is best accomplished before adulthood, as children are much better equipped to recover from the surgical event than adults are.
I am a 61-year-old woman.
After a lifetime of living with scoliosis and back pain that continues to get worse, including degenerative disk disease and arthritis, doctors are now recommending two-stage fusion and scoliosis correction.
My concern is that pain from muscles pulled in one direction will only be replaced by pain from being moved to a different direction.
In general, most patients having scoliosis surgery after exhausting the non-operative care options find a significant improvement in their pain after surgery, but nobody becomes completely pain-free.
They are, however, able to do all of their normal daily activities with a tolerable level of discomfort.
This is particularly true in patients who are unable to stand completely upright at the time and undergo surgery.
If we can get them so that their heads are square over their pelvis in the front to back and side planes, most find major improvements in their pain.
I have a Harrington rod for a thoracic curve.
The surgery was done almost 30 years ago, and at the time it was a good correction down to about 30 degrees.
I have had so few problems, even after several spills skiing, that I haven't had it x-rayed in about 25 years.
The last few years I have had some left shoulder blade and neck discomfort.
I can see that my head is not centered on my neck.
Should I have it x-rayed to see if whatever curve I still have might be a cause for the discomfort?
I would definitely see your doctor.
The asymmetry may not be related to the scoliosis and may be due to an imbalance of the muscles that support the head and neck.
You should have a thorough exam and most likely an x-ray to go along with it.
Interestingly, the x-ray can show abnormalities, but would not say whether those abnormalities are causing your pain.
Is it possible that the new MAGEC growing rod will be useful in the treatment of pediatric scoliosis, specifically congenital scoliosis with hemivertebrae?
This device is very promising.
I think it will be most useful for patients with early-onset scoliosis of any type to help manage curve magnitude during the critical early growing years.
What is the “growing rod” that I am hearing about for pediatric scoliosis?
A growing rod is a type of surgical procedure designed to treat early-onset scoliosis.
In children with advanced disease that are very young, sometimes spinal instrumentation such as a growing rod is placed to help partially correct and maintain trunk and chest height throughout the growing years.
It essentially acts as an internal brace providing some early correction of the curvature but mostly maintenance of the curvature as the child grows.
Unfortunately, growing rod constructs require repeat surgery roughly every six months to lengthen the instrumentation as the child grows.
For adolescent scoliosis, I have read that the amount of in-brace correction, combined with compliance of wearing the brace, is key to effectiveness.
