Insurance coverage varies, and this is why proper documentation would be beneficial to state why the oral medication is not effective.
Bisphosphonates are generally recommended for those with osteoporosis, yet there seems to be controversy as to whether or not they are appropriate for patients who have not yet had a fracture.
The numbers needed to treat are high, bone mineral density (BMD) is shown to increase but benefits in actually preventing fractures have not been proven.
They have been associated with osteonecrosis of the jaw even with oral use, and esophageal/GI complications.
We know the drug companies have pushed these drugs when they may not really be beneficial and now they have become a "standard."
What is your feeling on this controversy?
There is evidence of bisphosphonate use and the reduction of fracture in both the hip and spine.
Again, it is not recommended for everyone for prevention but especially for patients who are identified as higher risk.
We often use the FRAX model to help guide this decision.
There will always be benefits and side effects/complications associated with all medication, and this is why it is important that we use them appropriately.
The risk for osteonecrosis of the jaw is low, compared to the morbidity and mortality associated with hip fracture in patients with osteoporosis, but, again, we need to weigh the risk and benefit for each individual patient.
I am a female age 81.
I took Fosamax for eight years for my osteoporosis.
Eventually, the bone test showed I had osteopenia and I was taken off the drug.
This was many years ago.
I have herniated discs and arthritis in my back that gives me continuous pain.
Should I be taking some drug for osteoporosis at this time?
It sounds like you were on a good treatment of your bones, and the bone density test improved.
It is important to continue to monitor the strength of your bones with a bone density test at least every two years.
If there is a sign of significant worsening, restarting the medication may be an option.
Unfortunately, it will not help with the herniated discs and the arthritis pain.
It is used to help improve the strength of your bones and prevent future spine fractures.
Please explain the contradiction between hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for osteoporosis and reducing HRT as one ages.
I was told by one doctor I should not take so much HRT and another to take more to protect my bones.
It is often recommended to follow the two-year course of Forteo with bisphosphonate therapy, preferably with the once yearly IV formulation if no contraindication, for best improvement of your bone density.
I was on Actonel for about seven years and have not had any for the last eight years.
It upsets me that I was prescribed it for osteopenia when it wasn't really indicated.
Should I be concerned now about starting it again?
My endocrinologist does not advise it even though I have some osteoporosis.
Bisphosphonate therapy often works longer in your bones because of its longer half-life.
It may be indicated in patients with osteopenia who are calculated to have a higher risk of fracture.
It is important to continue to monitor your bone density tests regularly.
If there is worsening of your bone density test or if you suffer from a stress fracture, this would be an indication to be evaluated for starting therapy for your bones.
I have a bone density of -5.
How much improvement is possible in the two years of treatment with Forteo?
Why the two-year treatment limit?
Is it because of increased concerns of side effects?
Is this info correct?
Do you have any comments?
Beyond yoga, do you have any suggestions on other ways to improve posture and prevent spinal fractures?
Your bone density is very low.
It was stopped early because a particular breed of rats, (Fischer 344 rats), which are genetically engineered to get bone cancer, got bone cancer, and some of the scientists thought they got it sooner than expected.
Weight bearing exercises are important in developing bone.
Muscle strength is also important.
Yoga is a great form of exercise.
Other exercises can help posture and balance, too, and a physical therapist can help you.
Are there any concerns regarding long-term use of Fosamax?
Although Fosamax is among the safer medicines we have, after long-term use, there have been rare reports of osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femoral shaft fractures.
We found that some people can take a "drug holiday" from Fosamax.
As with all drugs, you and your doctor have to weigh the benefits versus the risks of taking a medicine.
Raloxifene has been shown to be a good medication in reducing risk for spine fractures and would be a great option, especially if there is concern for a high risk for breast cancer in the family.
We would still be able to monitor your bone density test to monitor the response and strength of your bones.
I would not recommend taking oral bisphosphonates due to esophageal risks, but the once yearly IV option still may be a good option for you if they are able to obtain IV access.
Can you speak to the drug Forteo.
Apparently, it is a daily injection for two years.
I am led to believe it is the only medicine that may build bone rather than just stabilizing bone loss.
My oral surgeon was very much against Prolia, which is my present medication, if undergoing a bone graft and implant procedure.
At this time Forteo is the only available bone-building medicine (anabolic agent).
Prolia might interfere with the bone building needed in the jaw area after bone graft and implant.
I would think Forteo would help bone growth.
Are there rheumatic and immunologic factors that are causative or associated with the development/treatment of osteoporosis?
I have had Hashimoto's disease for 25 years, am now experiencing arthritis and have the osteoporosis severity of someone in my 80s although I am in my early 60s.
I have been treated with Fosamax for about three years and am considering switching to Prolia.
I am getting appropriate levels of calcium and D3 and exercising more, but I’m making very small gains.
Lupus, rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis are some of the rheumatic diseases associated with osteoporosis risk.
Excessive thyroid hormone can cause bone loss, but I wouldn't worry, as I believe your doctor is monitoring your thyroid level.
I am a 55-year-old male who has osteoporosis, and I also suffer from kidney stones.
Could the two conditions be related?
In addition, I also have very low testosterone.
Could that also be a factor?
There are many causes of kidney stones.
An overactive parathyroid gland (hyperparathyroidism) can be associated with kidney stones and osteoporosis.
Low testosterone is among the more common causes of osteoporosis in men.
I have osteoporosis and also lost a kidney from kidney stones and can't take calcium.
I suggest you discuss this with your kidney specialist.
It may be possible for you to take calcium citrate.
You also may be able to get more calcium from your diet.
I love psychology, and I have heard many lectures on relaxation and wellness.
I know to take the oxygen first if you are the caregiver.
My situation has continued to escalate, and I have to take anxiety medications in very low doses to help me cope.
What new approaches can I put into effect to try to deal with this overload in my life, which causes palpitations, anxiety, fatigue, poor eating, etc.?
I sleep a few hours, but profound, because I finish my day exhausted.
I read a lot of positive thinking books, and I have tons of relaxation CDs at home with beautiful music.
What keeps me going is my great faith in the Lord, since I am a practicing Catholic and very strong in my religious beliefs.
I pray 24/7, no matter what I might be doing.
Is there something new I haven't tried?
I was on prescribed mood stabilizers for bipolar disorder.
I have since been taken off of them.
While I feel more alert, I’ve noticed mild stress and anxiety since then, especially in loud places, in crowds and in noisy family get-togethers.
I try listening to calming music, lying down alone in quiet.
Is there anything I can do when I am not at home to calm myself down?
Are there any stretches/exercises to help with stress?
My13-year-old teenage daughter has developed severe anxiety.
It is mostly social anxiety.
She had a panic attack about the consequences of turning a homework assignment in late.
It started out with school, but now she does not even want to be around extended family.
Are there any suggestions to help her deal with anxiety without putting her on medications?
I would recommend a child and adolescent therapist.
Many types of relaxation, including hypnotherapy, guided imagery and positive activities that will increase self-esteem based upon her specific interests, may be useful.
If she likes art or animals, there are many specific types of therapy, including art therapy, equine therapy or volunteer duties, that can help in this way.
I have had high blood pressure since my 20s (I’m now 66).
In spite of the medications (which work under normal circumstances), when I get in a stressful situation (e.g., medical procedure), my blood pressures spikes to 180/90 or higher.
Even when I was a teenager, my blood pressure would spike when I was getting routine sports medical checks-ups.
I am somewhat of a worrier and do take Cymbalta for anxiety.
Guided imagery and meditation related to reducing the physical effects of stress can be especially effective.
Hypnotherapy work will allow you to connect with limiting beliefs that are often formed in childhood on a subconscious level so that you can release these beliefs and begin to add positive affirmations whenever the stress and spiked blood pressure begins.
Meditation practices on a daily basis are very helpful as well.
Although I've been healthy my whole life.
I started having serious health issues in the beginning of 2015.
My whole life became very stressful at the same time.
I am finally getting over the major medical problems.
There is still a lot of stress in my life.
It seems one part of my body is always in pain, always wanting attention.
It shifts from one part to another.
This was never the case before.
I'm not sure how to describe it.
Holistic approaches, such as heart-centered hypnotherapy, could be a great resource to allow you to tune more into messages your body may be providing you.
For example, dealing with chronic pain often coincides with emotional stress.
Sometimes, it is helpful to speak to the pain, so to speak, to allow release to occur.
Other strategies that can help would be to imagine the pain leaving your body by surrounding it with a calming, healing light while breathing into the area of discomfort.
Are you familiar with EMPowerplus Q96 and their micronutrients?
What is your opinion of them?
I would recommend consulting with an integrative medicine physician regarding the use of any supplement, as well as the likely benefits to your individual overall health.
What are good and simple techniques to use to stay calm when you are very frustrated and stressed?
There is a positive technique that you can use by closing your eyes and imagining a comforting, relaxing place.
An example is the beach or another place in nature.
Identify a word that describes how you feel in that spot.
This is an anchor for you.
Bring your thumb and forefinger together.
Once you open your eyes, you can make this anchor at any time, and your body will remember the calm feelings.
The use of guided meditation is excellent, and you can download meditations for daily use.
There are many professionals who can assist, such as therapists, massage and Reiki practitioners, etc.
Do you have any tips for people interested in meditation who are just getting started?
Congratulations on your recent venture into the world of meditation.
Meditation is an excellent way to quiet the "business" of our conscious mind and busy lifestyles.
I would recommend looking into guided meditation groups, which are offered through The Center of Integrative and Lifestyle Medicine.
Also, it is not uncommon that during meditation one's mind may wander.
The most important thing to remember is to non-judgmentally shift focus back gently to your breathing or the guided meditation.
With practice this may get easier.
What is the correct way to breathe when trying to relax, in through nose/out through mouth or in nose/out nose?
How long should each breath be, and how many breaths are a good start for relaxation before beginning to breath normally again?
There are many different, and varying, breathing strategies that can induce a state of relaxation.
The most important thing is to breathe.
This may sound simplistic, but often when we are under stress, we as humans do not breathe fully or deeply, which can create more tension and stress within the body.
One strategy that may be helpful is a simple counting of the breath.
To begin, breathe in to the count of four, hold the breath gently to the count of two, and then exhale to the count of six.
You can either breathe in or out of the nose or mouth, whatever feels most comfortable.
I have had some recent flashbacks about trauma I went through at age 2, but don't recall otherwise.
I have considered hypnotherapy, but my counselor has advised against this.
I have a friend who was really helped.
What are the precautions or potential drawbacks versus benefits?
Does the hypnotist always help the person deal with new insights right then if they are traumatizing?
Can you explain a bit more how hypnotherapy works and how a person can find a qualified therapist, i.e., what credentials to look for.
Hypnotherapy assists you in accessing your subconscious mind and embracing your personal power, as well as increasing the ability for emotional regulation.
Many physicians, therapists (counselors or social workers) and psychologists are trained in these methods.
We offer a model called heart-centered hypnotherapy, which was created by Diane Zimberoff/David Hartmann of the Wellness Institute in Seattle, Washington.
They are very helpful in assisting people with connecting to qualified hypnotherapists all over the world.
How can hypnotherapy help with woman's health issues such as PCOS (polycystic ovarian syndrome)?
Mind/body techniques such as hypnotherapy and guided imagery can help to increase overall feelings of well-being by connecting with healthy emotional release.
This often assists in pain management as well.
Through individual hypnotherapy work, you can connect with any emotions that need to be released.
In addition, you can connect with healing of mind, body and spirit.
Often, emotions and physical sensations are connected in various ways.
Meditation and guided imagery are very positive in terms of relaxation and the creation of new neural pathways.
All of the modalities mentioned are powerful ways to connect with the subconscious in order to introduce and reinforce positive thoughts and, therefore, increase the positive experiences in life.
Discuss your specific concerns with a hypnotherapist to create an individualized plan for support.
My reactions to stress are probably deep rooted from childhood experiences.
I have managed to keep these feeling buried, as I do not want to relive anything.
It sounds like there are many unresolved emotional wounds you are attempting to avoid.
Heart-centered hypnotherapy would allow you to connect to the emotional pain, so that you could release the repressed feelings in healthy ways.
It takes a lot of energy to keep our emotions buried, and often, if not addressed, this can lead to unhealthy stress reactions, behaviors and/or physical manifestations.
The purpose of connecting to past trauma is so that we can release repressed emotions, nurture the inner child and change unhealthy subconscious conclusions to the positive.
This would also include making new decisions and behaviors that support overall healing-mind, body and spirit.
If there is a lot of growth remaining, this certainly could progress and may benefit from bracing.
Core stretching and strengthening or the Schroth Method of physical therapy may be beneficial.
As a parent of a 16-year-old that is currently having frequent backaches (which my daughter describes as six in one to 10 pain level - she has S curve with approximately 45 curve each), what can she expect as she ages if surgery is not performed?
At 45 degrees, she is right at the degree measurement where the curve should be followed, as it has a higher chance of further progression.
If it were to progress, surgery can be helpful to prevent further deformity but also to create better alignment of the spine.
In the meantime, I would advocate core stretching and strengthening to minimize discomfort and hopefully prevent further progression.
Can anything be done to stop progression of scoliosis?
I am a 59-year-old female who is very active.
My upper back curve is 47 degrees and I have a 34-degree lumber curve.
I have been searching for ways to keep my curve from advancing and am frustrated by the lack of information.
A year and 1/2 ago, my upper curve was 52 degrees.
I started doing Schroth exercises with a PT trained in the method.
My last x-ray showed 47 degrees.
I am aware that there is a five degree margin of error on reading the x-rays; however, at least it has not gotten worse.
I am not going to have a metal rod put in my back; I ride a horse four times a week and compete.
Please tell me where to get more information on exercises that will help me keep my back stable.
I am very, very motivated.
Adult idiopathic scoliosis curves typically progress 1/2 degree per year.
The fact that your curve has been stable is great.
At this point in time, there is nothing that "slows or prevents" progression.
Staying active is very important.
I am a 43-year-old adult with two 65-degree curves in my spine.
I am trying to avoid surgery, but do have chronic pain that differs in intensity from day-to-day.
I'm having specific trouble with my quadratus lumborum on the right side and have for several years.
It can be incapacitating.
I'm wondering if you recommend any treatment or therapy that could a) help keep the pain at bay, and b) assist in my muscle imbalances and, as a bonus, c) keep my curvature from worsening.
Do you suggest any combination of the above or other modalities?
You are doing all of the right things.
In general, the best treatment for the back pain component of scoliosis is a regular exercise program (focus on core strengthening and aerobic exercise).
Chiropractic care and massage are other good options.
These modalities will not correct the curve or prevent it from progressing, but they tend to help manage the symptoms.
It is rare for curves to significantly progress during adulthood.
Are there any dietary recommendations/counseling you provide to your adolescent scoliosis patients?
A well-balanced, nutritious diet is very much the key.
Patients who live in the North may benefit from Vitamin D and Calcium supplementation.
I am a 61-year-old female with untreated scoliosis that was diagnosed in my teenage years.
It was described as a double S curve.
It has gotten considerably worse, and the only thing my physical therapist has suggested along with exercise is to use a heel lift in my shoe on my short leg.
I have constant pain, which I just try to live with as I do not want to take excessive pain medications.
I have noticed in the last year, that quite often when I walk I can feel a popping in my lower spine.
Is this something to be concerned about?
What are the treatment options for someone of my age for scoliosis or for pain management?
A heel lift is often helpful if there is a mild leg length discrepancy due to a scoliosis.
The "popping" in your back is likely muscular in nature, and I doubt it is anything to be concerned about (from a stability standpoint).
In the absence of radiating leg pain (sciatica, usually caused by arthritis at the lower part of your spine), it is rare that surgery is recommended, but this is something you can talk to us about in the office.
How serious is a 30-degree curve in a 16-year-old?
She says she is in a fairly constant state of discomfort and does not want to do much in the way of exercise, participation in sports, etc.
Should we be pushing her to get more active?
Is yoga something good?
She does seem to get relief from her chiropractic visits.
Thirty degrees is a moderate curve.
It does not require surgery.
At 16 years of age, she should be done with spine growth, which also means that the curvature should not progress and get larger.
The back pain she has is not typically because of the scoliosis, but more typically because of tight back muscles and deconditioning.
I would highly recommend yoga, stretching and a gradual increase in low-impact cardio.
Are there any new treatments for scoliosis patients who have back stabilization problems?
Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) has become quite popular over the past five to 10 years.
MIS procedures are often a good option if there is a very "focal/specific" area of concern.
I personally do not do MIS scoliosis surgery.
My child is in that grey area as to whether surgery is recommended.
She wore a night time brace for approximately two years, but no longer wears it since minimal if any growth remains.
She has an S curve and is very balanced, but curvature has increased approximately one to two degrees over the past year that she hasn't been in the brace (she's 15).
Her back pain seems to be increasing within the past six months.
Are there any options other than surgery?
The only other option is getting involved in the core stretching and strengthening and the Schroth Method of physical therapy.
Once growth has decreased, if progression is going to occur, it does tend to do so at one to two degrees per year.
Is physical therapy necessary?
Physical therapy is a great way to learn a good home exercise program for your back (core and pelvic stabilization) that you can do on a regular basis.
Does scoliosis with more rotation than curvature respond differently (better or worse) to bracing?
All scoliosis is involved with rotation toward the area of curvature.
The amount of rotation correlates with the degree of curvature.
Therefore, the more rotation or the larger the curve, the less functional the brace will be.
I am an 83-year-old woman who has just recently been told that I have scoliosis.
I lean both forward and to the left side.
I am otherwise in good health, not overweight, have a healthy diet and walk three miles a day, summer and winter, mostly outside.
I have some lower back and neck pain.
I'm currently seeing a chiropractor once a month and do physical therapy twice a week (plus stretches at home twice a day).
What more can I do, and what is the prognosis for significant improvement?
Scoliosis is a relatively common diagnosis in adults over the age of 60.
In the absence of any leg pain (sciatica), the best treatment for the muscle spasms and back pain is exercise (core and pelvic stabilization, swimming, walking, etc.).
You are doing all of the right things, and I would encourage you to continue with the chiropractor, PT and exercise.
The prognosis is generally good.
My adult son (28) recently had a physical that included an x-ray and discovered he has a distinct curvature of the spine.
Is this likely to get worse?
If so, what are the consequences?
Are there measures that should be taken now to improve the future?
It depends on the magnitude of curvature.
If the curve is mild to moderate (less than 50 degrees), it should not progress now that your son is done growing.
Working with core stretching and strengthening is very important for overall spine health and can help prevent progression.
If the curvature is greater than 50 degrees, there is risk of further progression.
My right leg is about 2” shorter than the left.
My back pain is very severe, unless I take an oxycodone.
I only take it once or twice a day, only when needed.
Is the back pain due to the scoliosis or the shortness of the leg, or a combination of both?
I have relief after taking the medication.
I would like to be able to handle this without taking it.
Should I continue what I am doing, or is there a therapy to alleviate this?
The leg length discrepancy is likely putting more stress/strain on your hip and back muscles.
A regular exercise program (low back and hip abductor exercises) will likely help stabilize your spine and pelvis, and may help with some of the pain.
Anti-inflammatory medications are the first line of medication management, and avoiding narcotics is generally a good idea.
Injections are typically best for radiating leg pain (sciatica) as opposed to back pain.
I am 46 and had a C5-C6 fusion in 2005.
Since then, I have developed scoliosis in my mid back.
It gives me lots of muscle spasms that, in turn, twist my left ribs to the right and raise my left shoulder three inches.
I have been doing PT for many years and using many muscle relaxants.
I would like to stop the drugs; is there anything else that can be done for this issue?
The change in your posture (ribs and shoulder) may be due to the muscle spasms or from the underlying curve.
Scoliosis is a 3D deformity that causes spinal rotation.
Sometimes, trigger point injections help with localized muscle pain.
Otherwise, continuing with the scapular stabilization exercise program is the best line of treatment.
I have a 30-degree T5-10 curve to the right and a 40-degree T10-L3 curve to the left with lateral listhesis of L2 to the left.
I am 58 years old and, until recently, have experienced occasional aching, sometimes burning pain that can usually be relieved with stretching exercises and Tylenol or Aleve.
Lately, I have been experiencing some knife-like pain in my right lumbar area that stops me in my tracks until I can change my position.
Would you recommend physical therapy as a proactive attempt to decrease my pain/increase stability in addition to the trunk-strengthening floor exercises I already do?
I am concerned with the increased pain, but also concerned what effect any ongoing progression could have not only on my mobility but also on my vital organs.
In general, physical therapy and a regular core strengthening exercise program are a great way to treat back pain, especially in the setting of scoliosis.
It is very rare (unlikely) that the curve will cause any ill effect on your vital organs, unless the curve is greater than 90 to 100 degrees.
What exercises can I do to relieve pain?
A lot of back pain comes from tight back (paraspinal) muscles and hamstring muscles.
It is very important to gain forward bend mobility.
It is also very important to work with core stretching and strengthening with activities such as yoga.
Routine low-impact cardio activities can also be beneficial.
I had scoliosis surgery in 1983 with the Harrington rod inserted.
I was fused from T4-L1.
In 1998, I had the Harrington rod removed, as I was complaining of pain and they thought it was from the rod.
I have been relatively pain free, but I am having more pain now in my lumbar area.
I try to stay in shape and fit (including keeping my abs strengthened), but I am getting frustrated with the pain in my lumbar area.
Will I always have pain?
It is common for people to have low-back pain, even without a history of surgery for scoliosis.
It is unlikely that you will continue to have pain long term, and continuing with a regular aerobic and core strengthening exercise program is the best treatment at this time.
How valuable is a second opinion?
How standardized is the surgery now; do all surgeons use the same procedures and rods?
If you are confident and comfortable with your surgeon, you may not need a second opinion.
The surgery is fairly standardized, but the more fine aspects of technique will differ between surgeons.
There are many types of implants and instruments that can be used, so the use of a certain rod would be at your surgeon’s discretion.
My 16-year-old daughter was diagnosed with scoliosis nine months ago.
She is at skeletal maturity and her curve continues to progress.
Her lumbar curve is now at 52, and posterior fusion surgery has been recommended.
What are some of the key issues we need to discuss with the surgeon before planning the surgery?
I would have a thorough conversation with your physician, ensuring that he or she has comfort and confidence with the procedure and that you have comfort and confidence with your physician.
Ask about risks, alternative treatment plans, surgical expectations and postoperative expectations.
Can you tell me about surgery for scoliosis.
How long is the operation?
What is involved in recovery short-term and long-term?
The surgery for scoliosis is basically placing anchors into the spine and using these with rods to realign and then stabilize the spine in an improved position.
The bone of the spine is then prepared to allow it to heal together.
The typical scoliosis procedure takes approximately four hours.
The typical hospital stay for children with scoliosis is three days.
We strive for early mobilization and walking to help get them back to their normal lifestyle.
For approximately six months, we limit bending, lifting and twisting to allow for complete healing to occur.
My scoliosis operations were in 1977.
How long will the procedures last?
In general, 25 percent of patients who have a "fusion procedure" require an additional surgery at some point in their life.
The fact that you had surgery many years ago and are doing well is a good sign.
I have severe scoliosis and am 52 years old.
Can you describe surgery options including recovery times?
Not all patients with scoliosis benefit from surgery.
There are many different options for treatment, and the specific treatment is often are dictated by the type and magnitude of the curve, as well as the symptoms.
Some surgeries are "bigger" than others, but the recovery time is typically six months to a year.
What is the long-term health outlook for a teenager who has had the spinal fusion?
Our expectation is that once a patient has healed from their fusion that they should be able to return to most activities without difficulty and lead a very normal and pain-free life.
We suggest avoiding American football and high-diving after this surgery.
After back surgery (eight-level fusion) for spinal stenosis, disc degeneration and scoliosis, will the scoliosis ever improve?
It has been three years since surgery and I still cannot stand up straight.
I walk with a cane at 62 years old in spite of PT and aqua therapy.
Would re-examination of my spine be worthwhile?
It's never a bad idea to get another opinion.
At what degree of curvature is surgery usually recommended?
For pediatric patients, thoracolumbar curves have a higher chance of progression when greater than 40 degrees; thoracic curves have a higher chance of progression when greater than 45 to 50 degrees.
At those measurements, surgery would be recommended.
What are the biggest risks/side effects involved with surgery (both upper and lower curve most likely would require fusion)? 1) The infection rate is approximately two percent to three percent, and we do everything we can in order to minimize this.
2) The spine is realigned and held together with metal.
If there is too much motion early after surgery, the metal has a chance of failing and could require further surgery.
Due to this, we limit bending, lifting and twisting for six months after surgery.
3) The most concerning risk would be neurological compromise as the spine houses the nerves to the lower legs, bowel and bladder.
We do neurological monitoring for every scoliosis case to ensure that we do not run into neurological complications.
Can scoliosis contribute to a protruding stomach?
Scoliosis is a curvature of the spine to the side and does not typically correspond with a protruding stomach.
Sometimes, there is excessive curvature of the spine in a front/back plane known as kyphosis and lordosis.
If lumbar lordosis is excessive, it can certainly lead to a protruding abdomen.
If you are worried, an assessment by your physician and or an x-ray may help you better understand your condition.
My 23-year-old daughter has double scoliosis.
Will this affect her ability to have children?
This should not affect her ability to have children.
Scoliosis can progress during pregnancy and should be followed.
It may make it a bit more difficult to receive an epidural, but it should still be possible.
Is the problem of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women who will need surgery justification for the use of estrogens to avoid the great bone loss early in menopause?
Osteoporosis is a relatively common problem (in women and men).
There are many different treatment strategies for osteoporosis, but calcium and Vitamin D supplementation are typically first-line treatment.
I usually refer patients to our bone health team for evaluation and treatment.
I am a 69-year-old with severe thoracolumbar scoliosis not treated with surgery or brace.
My general health is very good, but my lung capacity is not.
A pulmonary doctor said that it’s due to the compression of ribs from scoliosis.
Recently, a physical therapist told me that my diaphragm is hardly moving – kind of frozen.
What do you recommend to maintain the best lung capacity possible for the future?
The best non-operative treatment is a regular aerobic exercise program to maximize cardiovascular/respiratory health.
How early should a child be checked for scoliosis?
What's the best way to determine if it's present?
Most pediatricians will check at each well-visit.
The most common time to identify scoliosis would be around 10 to 12.
Clinically, one would notice one shoulder elevated compared to the other shoulder or when bending forward one side of the ribs being more prominent than the other.
Girls grow earlier, so scoliosis might be identified a bit earlier.
I understand the exact cause of scoliosis is not known.
However, now that I have children, I was wondering if there are any measures that could be taken to try and ensure my daughter does not get it at some point in her life.
I know she is at higher risk with it running in the family.
There are no preventive steps to stop scoliosis.
However, early detection by a pediatrician is advised.
Screenings are typically performed at each child's well-visit, but a shoulder appearing higher than the other or the ribs protruding on one side versus the other when a child is bending should be brought to the pediatrician’s attention.
My test results read: Roto scoliosis with Cobb measuring 68 degrees right thoracic spine and 55 degrees left lumbar spine, coronal decompensation with coronal measuring -4, thoracic kyphosis measuring 62 degrees and lumbar lordosis measuring 55degrees.
The bones are demineralized and multilevel spondylosis.
Sacral balance measured from the C7 plumb line: the plumb line falls behind the anterosuperior sacrum by 1 cm.
Left iliac crest is positioned approximately 1cm above right.
Osteophytosis present at L1-L4, a decrease in disc space height at T12-L1 through L3-L4.
Facet joint arthropathy at L2-L3 thru L5-S1 tear L3-4.
There is a diffuse annular bulge that is causing mild left neural foraminal narrowing, borderline acquired central canal stenosis, a small Schmorl's node at left anterior aspect of the inferior endplate of L4.
Mild left neural foraminal narrowing at L3-4.
This is all the information that I have.
What is your guess at my prognosis?
What would be your guess at a plan of treatment?
I am 55 years old.
What about injections in my back?
Unfortunately, it is difficult to comment on the prognosis and/or treatment plan without seeing the x-rays and examining you.
Injections are typically indicated for radiating leg pain (sciatica).
In a growing child, bracing can be effective at preventing progression of scoliosis.
