What is hyperemesis gravid arum, and if you have it during one pregnancy, are you likely to experience it again with subsequent pregnancies?
How is it managed?
Hyperemesis gravid arum is nausea and vomiting during early pregnancy due to pregnancy-related hormones leading to metabolic changes, weight loss and dehydration.
Yes, it can recur in up to 2/3 of women.
Treatment consists of lifestyle changes, medications to treat nausea and supportive care such as IV fluids.
It typically gets better after the 1st trimester.
I had gestational diabetes during my first pregnancy.
Is it possible for it to come back during this pregnancy?
Are there any steps that I can take to avoid this?
Yes, there is an increased chance for it to come back.
You can start a program of regular exercise, diet and weight loss, which can reduce your risk for gestational diabetes during a future pregnancy.
What are the symptoms of having a miscarriage, and why do miscarriages generally occur?
Miscarriage occurs in about 20 percent of all clinically recognized pregnancies.
The most common signs are vaginal bleeding and abdominal cramping, which can also be experience during many normal, healthy pregnancies.
The most common reason for a miscarriage is a chromosome abnormality in the pregnancy.
Other reasons include abnormalities in the uterus, drug use including tobacco and alcohol, a deficiency of progesterone in early pregnancy (luteal phase defect) and medical diseases in the mother.
Often, we don't know why miscarriages happen.
I just found out last Saturday that I'm pregnant.
The first day of my last period was Oct.22, 2014!
I just went to the bathroom and there was a SLIGHTLY pink color on the toilet paper.
I have one other child who is 3, and I had no pregnancy problems.
Bleeding and spotting are very common in early pregnancy.
Although miscarriage often has bleeding and cramping, this is also found in many healthy pregnancies.
I would follow-up with your doctor for an ultrasound to check on the pregnancy.
I am having cramping and I do not know if this would be considered as pre-term labor?
What should I be concerned about?
Cramping can be normal in many situations due to the uterus getting bigger.
Preterm labor is due to contractions leading to cervical dilation.
Contractions most often are described as a tightening across the belly.
Often, your belly will feel very hard when you are having a contraction.
Generally, if you are under 34 weeks, we recommend that you call your doctor is you have more than four to six contractions per hour.
Also, vaginal bleeding and leakage of fluid can be signs of labor and are reasons to call your doctor.
I have a couple of cats and recently changed the litter before I realized I was pregnant.
Now I have read that toxoplasmosis can be caused by cat feces.
Should I be concerned?
What are the symptoms of toxoplasmosis?
Is it like the flu?
How do you know the difference?
What does it do to the baby?
Toxoplasmosis infection is rare, so you most likely will be fine.
It can occur from handling feces of an infected cat or, more commonly, from eating raw or under-cooked meat.
In most cases, there are no symptoms in the mother; but in some cases, it can present with flu-like symptoms.
There are blood tests to see if you have recently been infected or if you have prior exposure, which would give you immunity and prevent infection in the baby.
Going forward, you should avoid changing the cat litter, and wash your hands after handling your cat.
I would also keep your cat inside and away from animals such as mice, which could be infected.
Finally, cook all meat well before eating.
I hope this helps and you feel better about your situation.
Should I get a flu shot if I am pregnant?
If I don't get a flu shot and then get the flu, what are the risks to the baby?
We recommend all pregnant women get the flu shot.
There are no known risks to the baby from the vaccine.
If you get the flu when you are pregnant, it can be very severe, leading to early delivery or miscarriage.
Some pregnant women get very ill and can even die from flu.
I have a white blister on the left side of my labia, which is very painful, and I am 22 weeks pregnant.
I have been with the same man for 11 months.
You should have your doctor look at the blister.
It could be anything from an infected or blocked hair follicle to a sexually transmitted disease.
I cannot be sure without an examination.
I had chlamydia prior to getting pregnant, but did not even know it because I did not have any symptoms.
If it was treated, will everything be okay with my pregnancy?
You should be treated and then checked for chlamydia again later to make sure the infection has gone away.
It would also be good for your partner to be treated; otherwise, it could come back if you have unprotected sex with your partner.
I tend to get a lot of urinary tract infections?
What if I get one when I am pregnant?
You are at an increased risk during pregnancy, and there is a greater likelihood for it to spread to one of your kidneys.
Therefore, you should be screened frequently for urinary tract infections with periodic urine cultures.
If you get more than one during pregnancy, often your doctor will put you on a daily antibiotic to prevent further infections.
If I have a herpes outbreak during pregnancy will this affect the baby?
It could if the baby delivers vaginally and you have active lesions.
Generally, we recommend treatment in the third trimester for people with a history of genital herpes to prevent outbreaks around the time of delivery.
I am three months pregnant now, and I have completely avoided consuming high-mercury seafood from the day my pregnancy was confirmed.
I used to eat king mackerel on a rather regular basis almost three months prior to pregnancy.
Will this cause any harm to my baby.
You should be fine.
Just continue what you are doing.
I would also avoid shellfish and raw fish during your pregnancy.
I follow a strict vegan diet.
Is this a problem during pregnancy?
No, you should make sure you have good sources of protein, which can be found in many vegetables such as beans.
Avoid uncooked or raw meat.
Also avoid certain types of cheeses and dairy products that are not pasteurized.
You can always check with your grocer about this.
What are our risks in having a child with a congenital heart defect if it runs in the family?
The general population risk for congenital heart defects is about eight per 1000 (so less than one percent).
If there is a strong family history, the risk would be somewhat higher (two percent to five percent in most cases), depending on the type of defect and the number of affected people in your family.
Seeing a genetic counselor prior to getting pregnant could help give you a better idea of your own personal risk.
How are congenital heart defects detected?
And if one is detected, what are the next steps?
They are usually detected with ultrasound.
The next steps include speaking with a pediatric cardiologist and, in some cases, a heart surgeon to plan for the care of the baby after birth.
Sometimes, heart defects are associated with other genetic conditions, so genetic counseling and testing is sometimes also recommended.
I am turning 38 this summer and my husband and I hope to start a family.
I have heard that women over the age of 35 have a hard time conceiving, and they also have an increased risk of having a child with Down syndrome.
Are there any suggestions that you have for me to help make sure that I have the healthiest baby possible?
You should have a great chance to have more than one successful pregnancy.
Yes, fertility rates decline, but this really becomes more of an issue after the age of 41 to 42.
The risk for chromosome abnormalities is around two percent to three percent, with Down syndrome being the most common at one percent to two percent.
We now have tests that can screen for and detect these conditions very early in your pregnancy.
The best thing you can do for yourself is to get into shape for your pregnancy – eat healthy and exercise regularly.
Start taking a prenatal vitamin.
I have heard about a new blood test that you can have while pregnant that checks for chromosomal abnormalities.
Are there any restrictions as to who can get this test done?
Currently, this test is reserved for women with added risk factors for chromosome abnormalities, such as age > or = to 35, previous child with chromosome abnormality, abnormal screening test or ultrasound abnormalities.
Regarding fetal surgery, what kinds of problems can be addressed during pregnancy?
Fetal surgery has been mainly used for specific birth defects such as spina bifida, certain heart defects, diaphragmatic hernia and various types of growths/tumors in unborn babies.
Often, it is for the most severe cases where there are no other options for treatment.
There are only a few places across the country that offer this.
We do not offer this but can refer patients to the appropriate places.
Remember, planning for your pregnancy can be a big help, particularly if you have medical conditions or other risk factors for pregnancy-related complications.
With regard to the male side, stress is well known to lower fertility.
Many patients who go through major life events can conceive, but some women who have high levels of anxiety and depression can have lower fertility.
How does drinking alcohol affect fertility? For men, social drinking has not been shown to affect fertility.
Patients with very high levels of alcohol use can alter some of their hormone levels, which can affect their fertility.
So, responsible drinking is fine for fertility.
Will marijuana use affect fertility for either male or female?
Marijuana use does not affect female fertility, but using marijuana, smoking cigarettes, drinking alcohol or using other illicit drugs could be harmful to the pregnancy.
Marijuana can affect male fertility.
Men who are regular users of marijuana may have lower levels of the male hormone, testosterone, and higher levels of prolactin, a hormone that lowers male fertility.
The good news here is that if you stop regular use, your fertility is expected to recover over a few months.
What percentage of couples ends up in the “undefined” classification for fertility? of the couples who come to see us for infertility have female problems, 30 percent of them have male problems and 30 percent of them have both male and female problems.
This leaves about 10 percent of the couples in the “unexplained” infertility category.
What are some easy things I can do to promote fertility on the male side of things?
In general, our fertility is a window on our health.
So, if we exercise regularly, maintain a healthy body weight and avoid harmful habits such as tobacco use, our fertility will improve.
In the case of tobacco use, men who are regular smokers will have tobacco metabolites (by-products) in their semen.
These can cause sperm to die or have genetic abnormalities, which can affect a pregnancy.
In addition, the sperm can be damaged by oxidation, a type of chemical reaction that damages the outer covering of sperm cells.
Men who take antioxidant vitamins such as Vitamin C have lower levels of oxidative stress and may have better fertility.
In addition, eating fruits and vegetables, which are high in antioxidants, can also help fertility.
Can carrying a cell phone in my pants pocket really create problems?
It is best to keep the phone as far from the testicles as you can when you are trying to create a pregnancy.
Does it really make any difference?
Most experts believe that it really does not make a difference and that either underwear type is fine for fertility.
Could you talk about the use of the male hormone testosterone as it relates to fertility?
Some men use or have been prescribed testosterone in an attempt to improve fertility.
Unfortunately, testosterone use in men actually lowers their fertility.
When a man takes testosterone supplements, his body registers that he has plenty of testosterone in his circulation, and it turns off its own testosterone production.
It also turns off its sperm production.
This can be a big problem that can require six months to a year for recovery.
So, you do not want to use testosterone supplements of any kind while you are trying to create a pregnancy.
My husband and I have been trying to conceive for eight months now after our first pregnancy last March ended in a miscarriage and D&C at seven weeks.
We got pregnant on our first try, so naturally we are concerned about why it hasn't happened yet, and have started looking into some things.
My husband had a sperm analysis (SA) done, and my OB told us that his count and morphology are normal, but the "round cell count" is 11 million when it is supposed to be 1 million.
Is this cause for concern if all of his other numbers are normal?
(His SA was after a seven-day hold.)
Also, if my periods have been generally the same heaviness and length, would there be any possibility of scarring?
They are slightly irregular, but I chart temps, so I know generally when I ovulate.
My doctor says she can do a sonohysterogram, but only wants to order that as a last resort.
I know I ovulate every month, and our intercourse has been timed appropriately.
My OB plans to start me on Clomid.
Any suggestions are appreciated.
The possibility of scarring inside the uterus after a D&C is rare.
If there are any concerns about scarring, a hysteroscopy (placing a small camera in the uterus), a hysterosalpingogram (x-ray dye test to look inside the uterus and the fallopian tubes) or the sonohysterogram, as your doctor discussed with you, would be indicated.
If you are 35 years old or older, have a history of pelvic surgery or endometriosis, or a family history of early menopause, testing of your ovarian reserve (capacity of the ovary to produce fertilizable eggs) should be done.
There are a few different ways to check your ovarian reserve including bloodwork and ultrasound.
If your ovarian reserve happens to be low, perhaps you should have a consultation with an infertility specialist to discuss fertility treatment options.
Clomid is an option that most patients start with since it is easy to take and has very few side effects.
I am a 34-year-old woman, and my husband and I have been trying to conceive since Aug 2013.
(I went off birth control pills after 13 years).
I was diagnosed with a macroprolactinoma (11mm) and prolactin levels of 367.3 in Jan 2014.
I am being treated with 2.5 mg cabergoline twice a week, and my prolactin levels have been normalized since April 2014.
The side effects have been minor, but the hot flashes have been regular and intense since I've been on this medication.
I've been taking my basal body temperature (BBT) using ovulation prediction kits (OPKs) and monitoring other fertility signs, and according to all of these, I've only ovulated in the last two cycles.
My follicular phase has been very long (average ovulation at 39 days) and my luteal phase has been short (nine days and 11 days [used progesterone cream during this cycle]).
The progesterone cream did eliminate the hot flashes.
I am slightly overweight and have a low metabolism (resting 1150 calories), but I eat a healthy diet and exercise regularly.
Do you have any tips for managing this imbalance?
I assume that you are currently taking 0.25 mg of cabergoline twice a week, as 2.5 mg would be an unusually high dose of cabergoline.
Since your prolactin has been normalized for more than six months but you still have very long menstrual cycles, I think this is the time to speak with your physician regarding other possible reasons for your oligoovulation (infrequent ovulation) such as thyroid problems or polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Your doctor might also consider putting you on fertility medication such as Clomid or letrozole to help you ovulate more regularly.
What is involved with infertility testing?
On the male side, we start with a complete history of your health and a physical examination.
The critical lab test is a semen analysis, which looks at the sperm count, motion and shape.
Many times, we will need a repeat test to confirm the prior semen test.
On occasion, based on lab results or physical examination findings, we will need a blood test to look at hormone levels.
In addition, sometimes we will need a blood test to perform a genetic screen to make sure you do not have issues that could affect your health or that of your offspring.
We sometimes will also recommend a scrotal ultrasound to make sure the blood supply to the testicles and the testicles themselves are normal.
Infertility testing is tailored to each couple based on their medical history and risk factors.
During the first infertility visit, the physician will take a detailed history and may perform a physical exam to identify treatable risk factors.
Initial testing generally includes sperm testing (semen analysis), a hysterosalpingogram (test to make sure your tubes are not blocked) and further testing to determine if you are ovulating regularly.
Based on your medical history, hormone blood tests (such as thyroid stimulation hormone, prolactin, progesterone or male hormones) might be ordered.
Ovarian reserve testing (including bloodwork and/or ultrasound) is indicated in women who are over 35 years of age with a long-standing history of infertility or any concerns for poor ovarian reserve (capacity of ovaries to produce fertilizable egg).
If you have a history of heavy menstrual cycles, pelvic pain or pain during intercourse, a pelvic ultrasound is generally ordered as well.
I have already done laparoscopy, but the dye didn't come out from my tubes.
Does this mean there is a block somewhere in the womb?
Please explain to me what treatment is available to remove such blocks.
The treatment for tubal blockage depends on where the blockages are and the degree of the damage to the tubes.
If the blockages are from scar tissues outside of the tubes or endometriosis, surgery to remove the scar tissues is necessary to unblock the tube.
If the tubes are severely damaged, there is a chance that they may not be able to be repaired.
In that case, in vitro fertilization would be your next step.
A semen test looks at your sperm count, motion and shape at a single point in time.
Sperm counts can vary tremendously from day to day, so we will often ask a patient to do a second sperm test a few weeks later to confirm results.
Remember that sperm seen in a specimen today were made over the past two months.
This means that if you were sick with a fever or had a lot of stress in the past two months, it can show up as a low count today.
Most of the time, our counts will recover from these type of things so we would recheck a specimen to make sure.
What are the chances of pregnancy after laparoscopy surgery for moderate endometriosis on the uterosacral ligaments and POD?
No other fertility problems as of now for both partners.
What are the options if not successful in getting pregnant?
Can endometriosis recurrences occur?
Your chance of pregnancy after surgery for endometriosis depends on the severity of endometriosis, your age, your ovarian reserve and other underlying fertility issues.
Many women with mild to moderate endometriosis can get pregnant after surgery.
If you don’t have successful conception after six to 12 months of trying (post-surgery), there are several options that are available, such as fertility medications, intrauterine insemination or in vitro fertilization.
IUI is a procedure using a very small catheter to place a number of washed sperm directly into the uterus during the ovulation time.
The goal of IUI is to increase the number of sperm that reach the fallopian tubes and the egg(s), and subsequently increase the chance of fertilization and pregnancy.
This procedure is used in couples with mild male factor infertility and in women with possible scar tissues at the cervix from previous surgery.
It is also used to increase the chance of pregnancy in women who are taking fertility medication.
The sperm washing process generally takes around one and a half to two hours.
The IUI procedure itself usually takes around five minutes to do.
The procedure itself is almost similar to having a pelvic exam or Pap smear in your doctor’s office.
IVF is a process involving removing mature eggs from women’s ovaries, fertilizing the eggs with sperm, incubating the dividing cells (also called embryos) in a culture dish and then replacing the developing embryo in the uterus at the appropriate time.
IVF is indicated in couples with male factor infertility, tubal damages, women with poor ovarian reserve (low eggs supply), endometriosis, couples with genetic defects requiring embryo testing, or couples who have failed other conservative treatments.
Prior to removing mature eggs from the ovaries, the female partner will need to take fertility shots daily for one and a half to two weeks to increase the number of mature eggs she produces (ovulation induction).
While taking the fertility shots, you will need to have ultrasound and bloodwork done every two to three days to monitor the growth of the eggs.
So, IVF is much more complicated and sophisticated than the IUI.
I had a vasectomy?
What are my options for fertility?
Can a vasectomy be reversed?
Vasectomy is a common form of contraception used by almost 500,000 men per year in the US.
Up to 10 percent of men will change their mind sometime after their vasectomy and desire having additional children.
Fortunately, there are two effective options in this situation.
Most men choose a vasectomy reversal, which is an outpatient procedure where the tubes are reconnected to allow sperm flow and return of fertility.
The effectiveness of this procedure depends on the number of years since the vasectomy, with rates as high as 90 percent if less than four years and about 70 percent if over 10 years.
What is a varicocele and does it create issues with fertility?
A varicocele is a condition that is seen in between 15 percent and 40 percent of men.
It involves an enlarged group of veins in the scrotum.
The thinking here is that these veins can keep the testicles about a degree warmer than they should.
This lowers fertility in some men and, on occasion, we will recommend a minor surgery to repair this condition.
The surgery is an outpatient procedure and involves a small incision in the lower abdomen.
The enlarged veins are interrupted so they will not allow pooling of warm blood in the scrotum.
In general, almost two-thirds of men will have an improvement in their sperm tests after this surgery is performed.
My wife experienced a miscarriage with our first pregnancy at seven weeks, four days.
We found out recently that we are expecting again after several months of trying to conceive, and she is four weeks and a few days along.
She has a history of Hashimoto's disease several years ago and was treated with Synthroid.
After one year of taking the Synthroid, the doctor took her off of it.
She had her antibody levels tested after the miscarriage nine months ago, and her anti TPO level was 10.
She recently had a thyroid panel done at four weeks, two days, that did not include the antibodies, and her T4 was slightly low at 5.60, normal TSH (1.72), normal T3 uptake (43), normal T7 (2.41).
Since the demands on the thyroid are greater during pregnancy, should she be started on thyroid medication or should we look into testing her antibodies again, as those can also fluctuate?
Uncontrolled hypothyroidism can certainly cause problems with miscarriage and complications during pregnancy.
The best option at this time would be to watch her thyroid profile closely.
Generally, this should be checked every month in a patient with Hashimoto disease.
I have polycystic ovary syndrome.
Does this increase my chance of facing infertility challenges and if so, why?
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine condition in women.
The symptoms of PCOS include irregular periods, excess body or facial hair, acne and polycystic ovaries.
Women with PCOS are producing a slightly higher amount of male hormones that cause these symptoms.
Many women with PCOS have infertility concerns due to not ovulating regularly and having irregular periods.
Interestingly, the symptoms of PCOS are different from woman to woman.
Some have all of the symptoms described above while others have very mild symptoms.
So, having PCOS does not mean that you will have infertility problems in the future.
You should discuss your symptoms with your physician to determine if medical help would be necessary prior to attempting to conceive.
On the other hand, bladder issues cause sleep disturbance, if the need to urinate interrupts sleep too frequently.
Hormonal changes at various times of life can affect sleep as well.
For instance, hot flashes can wake perimenopausal women up at all hours of the night.
I had sex on the 28th of October.
After that, I had my period on the 25th or 26th of November.
But it’s been over a month that I didn’t have periods.
I did a pregnancy test, which was negative, but still I don't understand.
You need to speak with your obstetrics and gynecology physician.
At this point, I would repeat a pregnancy test if you still have not gotten your period.
I have been cramping for two weeks, and it started right after my period ended.
No bleeding, just cramps.
It’s been going on for almost two weeks and only stopped for one day; but other than that, it's constant.
I have had unprotected sex every time my partner and I have had sex.
My next period isn't due for a week or two, but could I be pregnant?
I've been trying for two years and nothing.
Could this be it?
Take a home pregnancy test.
You will find them to be the least expensive at The Dollar Store.
For individuals who have tried to conceive for over a year and have been unsuccessful, we recommend they see a doctor.
For those over the age of 35, you can see a doctor after trying for six months unsuccessfully.
Problems conceiving can range from problems with the uterus, with the fallopian tubes, with the ovaries or with the sperm.
I’m newly pregnant and having vivid dreams and nightmares.
They are really interrupting my sleep.
This can be normal due to some profound hormonal changes and bodily adjustments at the beginning of pregnancy.
I would discuss this with your doctor.
I’m 16 weeks pregnant and continually wake up hungry during the night?
What would a healthy snack be for me before bed or during the night?
To avoid gestational diabetes, always pick snacks, no matter what time of the day or night, that are high in protein and low in fats.
Examples might include hummus, nuts, yogurt, chicken breast, quinoa and avocado.
Avoid foods that are higher in carbohydrates every time you crave them.
If you have late night cravings, try a high protein snack before bed to get you through the night.
If you have a history of diabetes, gestational diabetes or a family history of diabetes, talk to your doctor about how your meals and appetite are going in pregnancy.
I am getting up to go to the bathroom a lot at night.
How much is normal, how long will it last – all of my pregnancy?
Around weeks six to eight, pregnant women may find themselves urinating far more frequently than normal.
This is a short-lasting issue.
At the end of pregnancy, with the uterus resting on the bladder, one may experience urinary frequency.
Consider limiting your evening fluids, but don't let yourself get dehydrated.
Drink plenty during the day. Additionally, urinary tract infection could be a possibility.
Discuss this with your doctor.
Signs of urinary tract infection include: pain with urination, difficulty starting or stopping your urine stream, urinary frequency, the sensation that you cannot completely empty your bladder and blood in the urine.
Is it true that it is best to only sleep on your left side while pregnant?
Sleep on your left side from about 17 weeks until delivery.
After about the first trimester, the uterus is large enough that it is out of the pelvis.
At around 17 weeks, the uterus reaches up to the level around the belly button.
At this point, the uterus is capable of pressing on the large blood vessel that delivers blood from the heart (aorta) and the softer vessel that returns blood from the body to the heart.
This softer vessel is called the inferior vena cava (IVC).
Compressing it by laying on your back or on your right side does not allow blood to return to the heart.
Since the IVC is located just to the right of the aorta, if we sleep on our left, we decrease the pressure on the IVC.
The heart is nicely set up for this as well.
When blood gets the chance to return from the IVC, the heart first pumps it to the lungs to get nice, rich oxygen.
Then, the left ventricle of the heart – which is the strongest muscle in the heart – pumps all that richly oxygenated blood to your body and your baby.
Are there any over-the-counter sleep aids that I can use while I am pregnant?
And are there differences during the different trimesters?
Starting a medicine on your own during pregnancy is not a good idea.
Talk to your doctor first before starting any medicine on a regular basis.
Generally speaking, Benadryl®  is safe in all trimesters of pregnancy, but make sure it's Benadryl without pseudoephedrine.
Some sleep hygiene tips for good sleep include making the room very dark, choosing to relax before you lie down for bed, exercising during the day to help your body crave rest.
It can be natural to have more interrupted sleep in the latter parts of pregnancy.
Remember that in the latter parts of pregnancy, this is a natural and normal part of the process, and don't let it stress you out more than it should.
If daily activities are being impaired by sleep deprivation, then talk to your doctor.
But if you happen to wake up in the middle of the night, choose low stimulation, calming activities.
Don't pick interesting books.
If all else fails, I've got a great organic chemistry book!
I'm 35 weeks pregnant and can only sleep on my right side.
Is that bad for my baby?
Generally, do everything possible to sleep on your left side, because it does help your baby.
Decreased blood flow to the fetus can affect all parts of fetal growth.
Sleeping on the right side can compress the large vessel that returns blood to mom's heart.
If the mother's heart doesn't have as much blood to pump out, the fetus doesn't get as much blood and oxygen.
I am a person who really needs eight to 10 hour of sleep at night.
How can I plan to get enough sleep when the baby arrives?
I am freaking out!
If you are one who is sensitive to sleep deprivation, enlist support!
Invite your family members to help out with the first month or so after the baby is born so that you have some safe opportunities to catch up on sleep.
Consider pumping your milk to get ahead so that your spouse or support system can help with middle-of-the-night feedings.
Having some frozen meals or easy-to-prepare meals on disposable dinnerware ready for those first two to three weeks can save some time in the evenings so that you might get to bed faster.
With the first child, nap when your baby naps.
If your other kids are in a daycare or babysitting situations, you will need to still use this to some degree when your newborn comes home.
If your kids are at home during the day, arrange some playdates or have a friend or family member at the house during the day so that you can catch up on sleep.
I am 30 weeks pregnant and can’t sleep because I’m so congested.
What is safe for me to take to help me get the sleep I need?
Benadryl by itself is safe to take during pregnancy.
However, pseudoephedrine is not as safe in pregnancy, so make sure the Benadryl product you choose is free of pseudoephedrine.
Also, consider some lifestyle adjustments: Take a warm shower before bed to let the steam clear up your congestion.
Elevate the head of your bed with an additional pillow or a folded towel under your pillow.
Talk to your doctor if your symptoms are persisting.
In the past, I have been dealing with restless leg syndrome.
Is this going to be a bigger issue now that I am pregnant?
Some say that restless leg syndrome can be related to iron levels.
These do change in pregnancy.
It is possible that restless leg syndrome could change in pregnancy; however, with routine use of prenatal vitamins and healthy amounts of exercise, this would most likely remain at bay.
What do I do if heartburn keeps me awake when I lie down?
Heartburn is common in pregnancy.
Heartburn is essentially the sensation of food or drink coming back up into your throat.
Tums®  is a safe option to keep at home for the middle-of-the-night heartburn flare-ups.
If Tums by itself does not improve heartburn, consider elevating the head of your bed to minimize the opportunity for food and drink to come back up.
Various foods may trigger heartburn for individuals, so pay attention to what foods are associated with your symptoms.
Timing your last meal before lying down could help.
Save two to three hours at the end of the day without eating or drinking to deter heartburn.
Finally, talk to your doctor about persisting symptoms.
There are safe medicines to use in pregnancy.
I suggest this because there are beneficial drugs for pain relief available, such as Cymbalta® , but whether or not you can take them depends on the other medicines you are taking for your other conditions, and this could be best managed with the help of a pain management specialist.
My surgeon recommends against injections for treating hip arthritis pain, although I have heard other practitioners such as chiropractors recommend it.
A cortisone injection into a severely arthritic hip joint may give someone temporary relief of the pain, but not long-lasting.
Typically, given the fact that the hip is a weight-bearing joint, a single injection in a six month period of time is the most frequent interval I would give one.
Typically, if there is minimal or no relief, I would rarely give another one, but not before the six month timetable has passed.
There is a risk of bleeding, infection and the possibility of creating a condition called osteonecrosis from frequent corticosteroid injections into any joint.
Also, frequent injections can, in some cases, accelerate the joint damage.
If you are having pain at rest in your knee and have failed multiple conservative treatment modalities, including physical therapy, anti-inflammatory agents and injections of corticosteroids or the lubricating medications such as HYALGAN® , you may be a conservative candidate for joint replacement surgery.
The risks of conservative therapy with anti-inflammatories, such as bleeding and kidney insufficiency, may outweigh their benefits.
There is a chat about joint replacement on August 19, 2015.
The three physicians presenting would be the best sources to discuss options for arthritis in your shoulder.
My left thumb base feels as if it is always "popping" out of place.
I went to a hand and microsurgeon who x-rayed it and gave me a diagnosis of arthritis.
He said the feeling of popping out of place is actually bone on bone.
I had a cortisone shot in September 2014 and a second one in January 2015.
Both injections helped for a few months, but now the pain has worsened considerably.
It now sometimes brings me to my knees when I feel as if I cannot get the joint back in place.
I'm in need of relief but not sure what my next options are.
I would suggest that you be evaluated by a board-certified orthopaedic surgeon with a strong association with a university.
Your next option is possibly surgery.
Which non-prescription drugs are best for treating arthritis pain?
I tend to use Tylenol Arthritis Pain, as the risk of GI bleeding, liver toxicity and renal toxicity are definitely reduced.
