This sounds like osteoarthritis.
I would again suggest splinting, occupational therapy and injections.
At some point in their lives will everyone be affected with some type of arthritis?
Most of us will experience some form of arthritis as we age.
Osteoarthritis is far more common.
Is it possible to have arthritis in one knee only?
I have a Baker cyst, and cortisone does not work for more than three to five days.
I finally had it scoped and there was minimal frayed tissue that the doctor cleaned out.
The swelling is not as bad or as often now four weeks later, but it still gets stiff and sore some days.
I was tested for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and I am not positive for that.
I am only 47 years old, and this knee is my only problem area.
Yes, it is possible to have arthritis in one knee.
Typically, RA involves more than one joint on both sides where it would be more symmetric.
Can osteoarthritis turn into rheumatoid arthritis?
No, osteoarthritis cannot turn into rheumatoid arthritis.
However, they can coexist.
If you have osteoarthritis in the knees, can you have leg pain with it also, or would that be an indication something else may be going on?
You can have some leg pain.
However, it should be evaluated to look for other causes such as referred pain from the spine.
Is arthritis of the spine associated with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis usually osteoarthritis?
Yes, it is a form of degenerative arthritis.
Rheumatoid arthritis does not typically affect the lower spine.
Can you have osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in your hands at the same time?
I know I have degenerative issues in both thumb joints, but I am wondering if the painful nodule at the base of the index finger could be RA?
Yes, you can have both.
An evaluation by a rheumatologist will determine if the nodule on your finger is in fact a rheumatoid nodule.
What conditions does a rheumatologist address as compared to an orthopedist and neurologist when symptoms are severe?
I have lumbar, sacral and hip pain and the inability to walk with a history of laminectomy with instrumentation and fusion twice.
Who should be consulted first?
If you have had previous surgical intervention, I recommend starting with a neurosurgeon.
How would you treat mild arthritis of the neck?
Mild arthritis of the neck can be treated with physical therapy to improve the strength of the neck muscles.
Tylenol®  (acetaminophen) would be first-line therapy.
Does pain and weakness in my groin area indicate a hip disorder?
Typically, pain in the groin does suggest hip pathology.
However, it can also be referred pain from other areas such as the spine or abdomen.
I would recommend an evaluation by a rheumatologist and imaging.
I have degenerative disc disease (DDD) in my cervical spine at C5-C6 and to a lesser extent at C6-C7.
This is a recent diagnosis.
I experience numbness, tingling, thigh, knee, and moderate foot pain as well as pain in my bilateral hips, buttocks and sacral spine.
Two years ago I was told that I have an 8 mm perineural cyst at S1.
I was told at that time that there was nothing that could be done.
I suffer from daily pain that is usually at least a 7.
I have recently gotten a pain management doctor who prescribed Vicodin®  (hydroxycodone).
However, I would much rather have an epidural injection.
I suffer from lupus.
I have many joint pains and problems standing and walking because of this.
Is there anything you can suggest?
I have a rheumatologist and I am on methotrexate 18 mg, Plaquenil®  (hydroxychloroquine) 200 twice per day, Neurontin®  (gabapentin) 600 three times per day, and Vicodin®  and Lidoderm®  (lidocaine patches) as needed.
Methotrexate is used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and not lupus.
So, a better diagnosis needs to be made.
I agree with the Neurontin®  if you have symptoms of chronic pain.
I do not advocate narcotic pain medications.
Plaquenil®  is a good treatment for lupus.
A thorough physical evaluation would be necessary to determine the root cause of the pain.
How do you deal with arthritis that is causing your hands to be deformed (in addition to pain)?
The most important first step is to determine what type of arthritis it is.
An evaluation with a rheumatologist to pinpoint whether this is rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis with appropriate treatments is recommended.
I have arthritis pain in both hands.
I am taking 50 mg of Ultram®  (tramadol) twice a day for pain and there is no difference.
I am also on Tenormin®  (atenolol) 50 mg and Lipitor®  (atorvastatin calcium) 10 mg.
What do you recommend that I do I recommend a rheumatology evaluation.
You may need to consider hand X-rays.
If only a few joints are involved and painful, you can do cortisone shots.
If the hand X-rays show erosions, you need to consider Plaquenil®  (hydroxychloroquine) I seem to have arthritis in the fingers of my left hand, which results in difficulty gripping and holding on to items.
Exercise seems to help a little bit with range of motion, but within a few minutes after exercising the joints are right back to being stiff.
Is there really anything that can be done and/or medicine that can provide relief for longer than just a few minutes?
I suggest that you be evaluated by a rheumatologist to determine whether this is rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis.
I am a 57-year-old woman with arthritis in my hands.
I especially feel it in my thumb joint.
Other than keeping my hands mobile, if there anything else I can do to prevent progression?
Assuming this is osteoarthritis, you may consider splinting, occupational therapy and injections.
What are the best over-the-counter anti-inflammatory products?
I never recommend daily use of pain medications like Advil®  (ibuprofen), Aleve®  (naproxen sodium), etc.
It is o.k. to take these infrequently—as needed only?
I usually advise my patients to take Tylenol®  Arthritis (acetaminophen) 650 mg one to two times a day, as needed only and not on a daily basis.
Long-term use of pain medications like Advil®  and Aleve®  can cause liver and kidney problems.
They also may raise your blood pressure.
Is short-term use of Lyrica®  (pregabalin) for disc herniation causing radicular pain dangerous?
With all of the precautions with this medication, it is disturbing.
Lyrica®  takes eight to 12 weeks to work effectively.
So, taking it for less than this time is not useful.
Please talk to your pain management doctor for further details.
What role do neuron receptors and ligands play in osteoarthritis (OA)?
Can one exploit this circuitry for pain reduction?
Medications like Neurontin®  (gabapentin) work through the nerves to alleviate the pain.
But, this is nerve-related pain in patients with diabetes or fibromyalgia.
Usually Neurontin®  does not help OA pain that is caused as the cartilage is worn out.
The back of my left knee has been swollen for several years.
I swim and walk regularly and stick to a largely plant-based diet.
The swelling can be better or worse, but never goes away.
Should I get a cortisone shot to reduce the swelling?
Will the effect last and for how long?
A cortisone shot may help, but first I recommend an ultrasound of the leg to evaluate for a Baker cyst.
If present, it will need to be drained under ultrasound guidance and this will help you with your pain.
I am an 85-year-old senior with arthritis in my back, shoulder, and now in both of my thumbs.
This is according to my spine health physician.
What, if anything, can be done to help with the thumbs?
I have tried wearing stretch splints.
They do help to keep them from being pulled painfully, but I can't wear them all the time.
I recommend cortisone shots for the thumbs as this is most likely due to degenerative joint disease.
You will need to make an orthopedic surgeon or a rheumatologist.
I have been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
I am a 51-year-old female.
I have been taking glucosamine with chondroitin for five weeks now and it seems to be working.
I am also taking a tapering dose of prednisone.
(I have been off of it for five days.)
I have had Hashimoto thyroiditis for five years.
I am taking 125 mcg Synthroid®  (levothyroxine) daily.
My rheumatologist has prescribed methotrexate, prednisone, folic acid, and flu and pneumonia vaccines.
I am concerned about side effects, but don't want the disease to progress.
At this point it is affecting my fingers and wrists.
I am trying to rule out the cause.
I have been tested for parvovirus and Lyme disease, but I haven’t received the results yet.
I am checking into bioidentical hormones and mercury toxicity.
(I have had six silver fillings removed.)
I can’t wrap my mind around this of not understanding a cause and with no cure.
I quit smoking, but have a wood-burning stove.
I have no family history of RA.
Any advice would be appreciated.
If you have been diagnosed with RA, I recommend treatment for this before more damage and deformities develop.
If you would like to have a second opinion before starting these medications like methotrexate, that should be o.k. too.
Glucosamine usually does not help RA.
If at all, it is meant for osteoarthritis.
My daughter was 21 years old when she developed a rare autoimmune disease (granulomatosis with polyangiitis).
Her symptoms included severe arthritis joint pain and swelling throughout her body.
Although she is now in remission, she still suffers monthly joint pain associated with her monthly cycle.
For the rest of the month she is pain free.
For 10 years preceding she developed this autoimmune disease, she suffered symptoms of hormonal imbalance (infrequent periods, hot flashes, facial flushing, mysterious rashes, sweaty palms, etc.).
With autoimmune disease disproportionately occurring in women (75 percent and on the rise)—especially in adolescent girls and young women—can you discuss the connection between hormones and immunity and the implications for hormonal imbalance (estrogen dominance, progesterone deficiency) to predispose females to developing autoimmune disease?
How can and should hormonal imbalance, especially in adolescent girls, be addressed?
How is it best diagnosed and treated?
Diseases like rheumatoid arthritis are nine times more common in women than men due to hormonal factors.
It is entirely unclear as to which hormones play a role in this though.
Are hip replacements done 12 to 13 years ago subject to requiring a replacement?
Periodic evaluations by an orthopedic surgeon to assess the integrity of the joint replacement should be done.
Do you have any information regarding the success of biologic medications—specifically, Orencia®  (abatacept) to treat rheumatoid arthritis?
These are very good medications and help if indication.
But first you should be on an oral medication like Arava®  (leflunomide) or methotrexate.
If these do not help, then Orencia®  can be added if indicated.
We have a lot of success with biologic therapy in treating rheumatoid arthritis.
What would be corrective action for a bone spur resultant from knee (medial meniscus) surgery 40 years ago?
I am experiencing pain when taking long walks.
Surgery probably would be the best.
I would recommend an orthopedic evaluation.
What is the best way to eliminate arthritis pain?
Does physical activity help or does it need to be addressed with medications?
If it is osteoarthritis, then pain medications should help.
However, I always recommend physical therapy to prevent joint loss and mobility.
If it is inflammatory arthritis—like rheumatoid arthritis, then stronger immunosuppressive medications are needed.
I am 80 years old of normal weight with osteoarthritis.
I have had two hip replacements about 12 years ago, cervical spondylosis and some lower back pain.
I find most exercise too difficult and painful.
I do not take pain medication except for Advil®  (ibuprofen) occasionally.
I try walking when possible.
Other than that, can you suggest anything?After an appropriate evaluation by a spine doctor or rheumatologist, you may consider a course of physical therapy with aquatherapy.
I have osteoarthritis in both knees.
I have had a Synvisc®  (hylan G-F 20) shots in one knee that were very painful, so I hesitate to have them in the other knee.
I have been going to a chiropractor who is doing cold laser therapy and the knee pain is almost gone.
The only problem I am still having is the throbbing at night.
Is there anything that can relieve that?
Also, what type of exercise would you recommend?
I used to walk at least three miles per day, and now I just can't do it.
Walking is a great exercise.
The longer you walk the farther you will be able to go.
Do not stop walking.
I recommend quadriceps strengthening exercises for the knee pain to strengthen the quadriceps.
Yes, it can be helpful.
A good rule of thumb with any exercise is not to push through pain.
Some positions can be modified for those with specific conditions.
I have arthritis in my hands (at the joints at the base of my thumbs) as well as a frozen "trigger-finger" thumb.
I anticipate surgical correction of this on May 12.
I am concerned that the pain seems to be getting worse as time goes by.
Would that help my arthritis and overall health at my age of 74 years old?
Trigger fingers may improve with cortisone shots.
I am not aware whether a sugar-free diet that might help, but there is no harm in trying.
Is a gluten-free and sugar-free diet useful to counter the inflammation in the gut to help immune issues such as lupus and arthritis?
I am not sure if this helps, but there is no harm in trying this and seeing if this benefits you.
Each individual is different and may help some more than others.
In addition to sugar, what foods contribute to inflammation and arthritis pain?
However, people both doctors who practice alternative medicine and some patients believe a gluten-free diet helps.
Additionally, there believe citrus foods can worsen arthritic pain.
I do not have any specific recommendations regarding this Is there any total natural treatment for osteoarthritis?
If it is hand osteoarthritis, I recommend daily hand exercises, soaking hands in warm water, and you may try paraffin baths.
For knee osteoarthritis, daily walking and weight loss help.
Quadriceps strengthening exercises also help.
Water aerobics is good because if does not put pressure on the knees.
What foods and natural supplements are effective in mitigating pain and reducing joint inflammation?
Usually ginger and turmeric are beneficial.
We always recommend 1500 mg of calcium daily in divided doses and 2000 units of vitamin D for bone health and to prevent osteoporosis.
What dosage of turmeric and ginger do you recommend daily?
There is no specific dose, just buy either turmeric pills over the counter or in powder form.
One tablespoon full in milk or water is good daily.
You may also take this with honey.
You can use ginger in cooking with no specific amount.
I am 74 years old, and have pain in both shoulders from arthritis.
My orthopedic surgeon says MSM (methylsulfonylmethane) is worthless; but I read a physician-written book that says it's wonderful for relieving pain.
What's the current thinking on MSM.
My doctor recommended glucosamine for large joint pain.
Do you also recommend that?
No definitive data is available to prove it is useful.
Is that something that is recommended?
We do recommend it in some instances.
There is a Department of Integrative Medicine that uses alternative treatment methods.
However, I am not aware of any rheumatologists who do this.
So please check with your insurance first.
Indirect consequences of breaking bones, like altered gait, blood clots, bed sores, lung conditions and gastrointestinal issues— and even death, can all occur as well as depression that comes from a loss of independence and mobility.
Osteoporosis can be treated very effectively.
As bone density is the major way in which we "measure" osteoporosis objectively, we are limited in knowing if it is actually treated or reversed, since bone density is only a component of what makes up bone strength.
People can break bones due to osteoporosis despite a normal bone density, a condition known as "clinical" osteoporosis.
Furthermore, the risk of breaking a bone while taking bisphosphonates goes down disproportionally with only slight relative improvements in bone density.
I am a 65-year-old man who has had a heart transplant three years ago.
I currently take 7.5 mg prednisone daily, and I have osteoporosis.
I am currently on Reclast®  (zoledronic acid).
My last bone density test score for right femoral neck was T-score -1.7 and Z-score -0.6.
I have neck pain.
Could it be caused by the osteoporosis?
Osteoporosis is likely not the cause of the neck pain.
Osteoporosis does not cause any pain symptoms unless a person has fractured a bone in that area.
What medical conditions lead to bone loss?
Common medical conditions that lead to bone loss include hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, inadequate calcium intake, and lack of weight-bearing activity (i.e., patients in bed or in wheelchairs), and use of medications such as steroids (i.e., prednisone).
What does it mean if a reading suggests secondary bone loss?
This is very important for your doctor to pursue.
Secondary causes are many and mean osteoporosis that is being caused by another condition or medication, rather than primary osteoporosis that is caused by genetics, aging, etc.
Without identifying and treating secondary causes, continued bone loss is likely to occur.
There are many examples of secondary causes, some common and some more rare conditions.
Examples are inflammatory conditions like rheumatoid arthritis, premature menopause, testosterone deficiencies, kidney failure, etc.
I use an elliptical six days a week for 50 to 60 minutes on level 18 on the random setting.
I am still losing bone mass in my hips and spine.
I also use eight and five lb. weights daily.
I take calcium called Bone Strength Take Care®  daily and drink one glass of almond milk daily that has 45 mg calcium.
I eat a green salad almost daily and eat Brazil nuts to get magnesium.
I had radiation treatments for breast cancer in 2005 and then I took an aromatase inhibitor for five years.
I have had knee surgery, so it was suggested that I not use a treadmill.
I am willing to use a treadmill if that is what it takes to build bone mass.
Oh, I'm also 69 years old and very active.
If you are still losing bone mass despite everything that you are doing, medical evaluation needs to be done for other medical conditions that contribute to bone loss other than postmenopausal osteoporosis and decrease in bone mass due to aromatase inhibitor.
I was diagnosed with squamous cell cancer of my anal canal last May.
I went through 25 radiation treatments and two rounds of chemotherapy.
A few years ago, my vitamin D level was 49.
Now it is at 28.
Two years ago, I was diagnosed with osteopenia.
I have gone through menopause over six years ago.
I am now diagnosed with severe osteoporosis with a Z score of -3.4.
I also have a compression fracture of L5.
Given the fact the radiation treatments surrounded this area, could radiation and chemotherapy be contributing factors for this drastic bone loss?
I am 56 years old and very active.
I don't understand all of this.
I am assuming your diagnosis of osteoporosis is based on a T-score of -3.4 and not a Z-score of -3.4.
Radiation exposure of bone could contribute to abnormalities of the bone—including a decrease in bone mass.
Your decrease in bone mass may be more related to the accelerated bone loss that women go through within the first five years after menopause (cessation of periods) rather than radiation exposure.
A medical evaluation for other health conditions that may contribute to accelerated bone loss is also warranted.
I have been told my bones are very deficient in calcium.
Yet I have been an avid exerciser (weight lifting and “cardio” aerobic exercise) for decades and eat a good diet.
I am unable to take any more Boniva®  (ibandronate sodium) or Fosamax®  (alendronate) as I had a bad reaction in my jaw.
I am currently taking 1,000 units of vitamin D and 1,200 to 1,500 mg calcium daily.
Is there anything else I can do to strengthen my bones?
I am very frustrated by my poor test results.
If your bone density shows that your bones are weak and your calcium intake and exercise regimen are both adequate, there may be other medical conditions present that may contribute to weak bones, such as hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, and low vitamin D level.
Conditions such as these and others can be evaluated initially through the performance of blood tests.
Before excluding the possibility of taking medications in the same family as Fosamax®  and Boniva® , I would make sure to confirm that the reaction you had in your jaw was truly related to the medication and not coincidence.
If it was truly a reaction to the medications, there are other medication families that can be used to treat weak bones.
How does one balance bone loss from taking Arimidex®  (anastrozole) with a diagnosis of osteoporosis?
I realize that being diagnosed with breast cancer can be devastating and the last thing anyone in that circumstance wants is to get another medical condition from treatment.
However, bone loss can be easily prevented and/or treated with bone medication during treatment with Arimidex® .
Additionally, bone density usually comes up after Arimidex®  therapy is finished.
I always advocate doing whatever you need to do to treat the cancer and we can easily treat your bones.
Does calcium channel blockers such as verapamil and the blood thinner Plavix®  (clopidogrel bisulfate) harm bones?
Not that I know of.
However, there are indeed a long list of medications that can impact bone, including commonly used medications like strong antacids (proton pump inhibitors, PPIs), SSRIs (serotonin specific reuptake inhibitors, which are antidepressants) and certain diabetes medications.
A review of your medications with your doctor is a good idea and eliminating the use of any that are not critical should be considered at least annually.
Some medications end up on our medication lists and never fall off.
Some medications should be weaning off of, like long term PPIs, if appropriate.
I take Keppra®  (levetiracetam) and Vimpat®  (lacosamide) for seizures.
Do either of these drugs have an impact on your bone density?
Anti-seizure medications such as Keppra®  and Vimpat®  may potentially contribute to decreased bone density.
However, if these medications are needed to treat seizures, the usual course of action is to treat low bone mass or osteoporosis if the patient has a problem with bone density on these medications rather than stopping the medication.
I have been taking Synthroid®  (levothyroxine) and warfarin since 1995 and will continue for the rest of my life.
How is calcium and vitamin D3 uptake affected by these drugs?
I have been diagnosed with osteoporosis and do not take any medication at this time.
Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) is a known cause of osteoporosis.
Theoretically, if you were on too high of a dose of Synthroid®  and /or required a suppressive dose due to treatment for a history of certain types of thyroid cancers, this could reduce bone density.
Heparin therapy, but not necessarily warfarin, has been linked to decreasing bone density.
If you have osteoporosis, you should have a tailored secondary evaluation, medical history review, and initiation of appropriate bone agents.
I have systemic lupus erythematosus for over 20 years.
I am taking 5 mg prednisone, and sometimes I take up to 20 mg.
My bone mass reduced to -1.5.
I am getting my second Reclast®  (zoledronic acid) injection.
Do you have any other recommendation?
Reclast®  infusions annually can be an effective medication to prevent further bone loss in someone with your medical history.
It is also important to maintain adequate calcium intake between 1,200 to 1,500 mg daily for postmenopausal women and maintain adequate vitamin D levels based on blood test along with getting 45 minutes of weight-bearing exercise four to five times per week.
If your prednisone dose is regularly over 7.5 mg daily, Reclast®  may not be strong enough to maintain bone mass.
Repeat bone density test annually is needed to determine trend in bone mass.
What is the current thinking about osteopenia?
What bone density numbers are signals for which treatment protocols?
Some bone experts do not consider osteopenia a medical condition because it simply reflects low bone density.
However, most individuals who break a bone have bone densities in the "osteopenic" range, as there are simply more patients who fall into this range than that of osteoporosis.
Decisions to initiate bone medication need to be individualized for every patient.
However, there is an online internationally available tool developed through the World Health Organization, called the FRAX®  (fracture risk assessment tool), which helps to guide when and in whom therapy should be started in patients with osteopenia.
It has limitations though in how it was created.
I have a family history of severe osteoporosis.
I would like to have a bone density test done yearly.
What time frame would you suggest for having this test?
I am willing to pay out-of-pocket for the test, if necessary.
It is great to be proactive.
However, bone densities usually change a small amount annually, thus more frequent testing is not necessarily better testing.
This is why bone density testing is not recommended more than every two years for most patients unless you have certain high risk conditions (like long-term steroid use).
I would concentrate mostly on reducing the modifiable risk factors that you can control, i.e. not smoking, exercising, limiting alcohol, etc.
Is T-score always a measure of bone density, or does it also indicate bone strength?
Which most predicts future fractures?
T-score is a measure of bone density which we use as an approximate measure of bone strength.
How severe is bone loss with T-scores in the -2.8 range?
When discussing osteoporosis, we generally categorize osteoporosis into regular osteoporosis and severe osteoporosis (i.e., a T-score less than or equal to -2.5 and fracture related to osteoporosis).
In looking at T-score of -2.8, your bone mass is less than lowest 1.25 percent of normal healthy population with regard to bone mass.
Is a T-score age adjusted?
If I have a -2.5 in my 60’s and my mother has the same -2.5 in her 80's, are we at equal risk or is her risk of bone fracture higher?
T-score is not age adjusted.
T-score compares a person's bone density to a health normal individual.
An older individual with the same T-score as a younger individual has a higher risk of fracture.
In your opinion, which of the prescription medications for osteoporosis is the safest (with the least number of side effects)?
Most of them are incredibly safe even compared to medications used to treat blood pressure, cholesterol, etc. with very few side effects.
I recommend an individualized review of your full medical history to determine what is best for you.
I am a patient with lots of allergies and sensitivity to drugs.
Regarding the osteoporosis for which I have been treated for many years.
I have tried Fosamax®  (alendronate), but it caused esophagus problems.
Actonel®  (risedronate sodium) caused burning in my chest area and upset stomach.
Intravenous Boniva®  (ibandronate sodium) caused jaw and ear problems.
Forteo®  (teriparatide) caused my pulse rate to go up to 152, and Miacalcin®  (calcitonin-salmon) which I returned to taking, and now I am told I cannot take it as it causes cancer.
I am wondering if you have any suggestions except for calcium and vitamin D?
My medical history at this time includes POTS (postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), heart valve problems and bronchiectasis.
Possible treatment options include Prolia®  (denosumab) if you are not currently undergoing chemotherapy for treatment of leukemia.
Intravenous Reclast®  (zoledronic acid)—another bisphosphonate like Boniva® , Fosamax® , and Actonel® —is also a possibility since adverse reaction with one medication in one family does not necessarily imply same reaction with another medication in the same family.
How common are the severe side effects of Prolia®  (denosumab) injections?
Are there alternative medications after using Fosamax®  (alendronate) and Actonel®  (risedronate sodium) for 10 years?
In my experience with Prolia® , side effects related to it are very rare.
I personally generally avoid using it though in patients who have frequent infections or have suppressed immune systems.
There are several other treatments for osteoporosis available and choosing between them requires a personalized approach with a review of your specific medical history to choose the best option for you.
Additionally, you may qualify for a drug holiday after 10 years of a bisphosphonate without the need for any prescription medication for a number of years.
You would need to be monitored during that time to ensure you are not experiencing significant bone losses and/or breaks.
Is Prolia®  (denosumab) considered the "preferred" treatment after using Fosamax®  (alendronate) and Actonel®  (risedronate sodium).
The concepts of drug holidays have been discussed in this health chat.
Sometimes, patients can be followed completely off of any bisphosphonate after three to five years of use.
Sometimes they need to go back on a bisphosphonate after that interval of being off of it if their density starts to drop again and/or they break a bone.
Sometimes they should be switched to an alternative form if they are thought to need another agent after a holiday and/or are on it and thought to be failing therapy.
Can you kindly address the safety of Prolia®  (denosumab)?
Isn't it likely to cause problems—even cancer—if it allows the building of bones, but prevents the elimination of old bone?
Overall, Prolia®  (denosumab) is a safe medication.
It works mainly by reducing the resorption of bone, but does not prevent its elimination altogether.
Over time, there is an increase in bone mass.
The most common side effects of Prolia®  are joint pain, back pain and arm and leg pain, which occur in up to 12 to 14 percent of individuals.
Cancer risk for the medication is three to five percent.
I have osteoporosis of the spine (-2.9 T-score), left and right femoral necks (-2.6 T-score) and total hip -2.0.
I have already been on Fosamax®  (alendronate) for more than five years, and then Actonel®  (risedronate sodium) for more than five additional years.
Following breast cancer surgery and radiation, I was put on Arimidex®  (anastrozole) for the past six years, which further compromises bone health.
My oncologist wants to put me on an injection of Prolia®  (denosumab), but I am afraid of all the terrible side effects it can cause.
Can weight-bearing exercise, diet and calcium supplements alone—without Prolia® —arrest further bone loss?
Can I wait to see if my bone density numbers worsen before taking Prolia® ?
Is there any alternative drug that is safer with fewer side effects?
Breast cancer recurrence prevention vs. osteoporosis prevention is a dual edged sword.
Given that you have already been on treatment with either Fosamax®  or Actonel®  for more than 10 years, as long as your bone density is stable and you have not broken any bones related to osteoporosis, additional treatment may not be necessary.
If you are remaining on Arimidex® , consideration can be given to initiation of Prolia®  even if bone density is stable and you have not broken any bones.
Exercise, diet and calcium supplement help to prevent bone loss, but sometimes are not enough.
The half life of Prolia®  is about one month.
Currently, there are patients on Prolia®  for more than eight years without any long-term implications with regard to immunity and brittle bones with atypical fractures of the hip and ONJ.
There is no consensus opinion that Prolia®  needs to be stopped at any time due to this risk in terms of the patient population as a whole.
Obviously, if one of these adverse effects occurs in an individual patient, the medication would need to be discontinued if it was believed to be a possible cause.
Will exercise, diet and calcium supplements stop bone loss?
Are the serious side effects of Prolia®  (denosumab) common, and are there alternative medications to arrest the progression of osteoporosis?
Exercise, diet and calcium supplements are important to preventing bone loss but by itself may not be sufficient to stop bone loss.
The most common side effects with Prolia®  occur in up to 15 percent of individuals who use the medication.
Serious side effects generally occur in five to 10 percent of individuals who use the medication.
Alternative medications for the treatment of osteoporosis include bisphosphonates i.e. Fosamax®  (alendronate), Actonel®  (risedronate sodium), Boniva®  (ibandronate sodium) and Reclast®  (zoledronic acid) along with Forteo®  (teriparatide) (daily injectable medication for osteoporosis).
We know that in patients with osteoporosis who are taking bisphosphonates, the bone is less thin, but it does not have the same quality as new bone because more old bone cells remain.
What are the implications of this for healing after any surgery that involves the breaking of bone?
And specifically, what are the implications for open heart surgery in which the sternum is cut open?
Bisphosphonates have definitively have been shown to reduce fractures.
Discuss these specific concerns with your surgeon.
I was on Fosamax®  (alendronate) for four years and I was then taken off the medication.
After two years, my bone density numbers declined substantially.
I am back on Fosamax® .
What are the risks of being on this medication for longer periods of time?
I am currently taking calcium with vitamin D, and exercising.
Are there other things I can do to prevent this continued decline.
I am 57 years old.
It is common and often recommended now to consider a drug holiday after three to five years of bisphosphonate therapy, as this particular class of osteoporosis medications incorporate into the bone for a long period of time.
Drug holidays, which mean stopping the drug for some interval of time—usually years, came about due to growing evidence that the extremely uncommon untoward conditions of osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femur fractures become more common with longer durations of treatment.
Monitoring should occur, as it sounds like it did in your case, during such drug holidays to ensure that you do not begin to lose too much bone off of the medication.
Whenever there is recurrent loss, testing to exclude other causes of the loss, for example secondary causes of osteoporosis, should be considered, even if they were done years prior at the time of the original diagnosis.
Additionally, sometimes switching the form of bisphosphonates, such as to the intravenous form, may ensure better absorption of the medication and or switching to an alternative class of osteoporosis medication.
What are the side effects to taking a daily injection of Forteo®  (teriparatide) for osteoporosis?
The most common side effects to taking a daily injection of Forteo®  is muscle aches, joint aches and bone pains.
Most of the time, these symptoms are tolerable and treatable with Tylenol®  (acetaminophen).
Other side effects include high calcium level and high uric acid level.
The most concerning side effect leading to a “black box warning” regarding osteosarcoma has never actually been confirmed to have occurred in patients on Forteo®  and attributed solely to the medication.
