However, if you cannot tolerate the pain, and the braces and inserts aren't working, surgery is the next step.
I am an 83-year-old male with arthritis and Paget's but no special treatment.
That was about 17 years ago.
My most recent test was in 2012 at 276.
I have needed treatment for cervical spondylosis and lower back pain.
I have taken turmeric and curcumin capsules for almost five years and it has helped.
Do you have any suggestions for self help?
I have been to PT on occasion.
Given your age, it is most likely that your neck and low back pain are related to osteoarthritis.
The pain from Paget's can, however, be difficult to differentiate from osteoarthritis.
It would be reasonable to request repeat testing of your alkaline phosphatase since your most recent result dates from 2012.
I agree with Dr Deal that there is nothing to do if your alkaline phosphatase is less than 300.
If it is above 300, I would recommend repeat evaluation for the Paget's.
Both ibuprofen and naproxen are NSAIDS (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories) and can cause similar long-term complications.
One is not better than the other.
Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is another option you can consider.
You should be under medical care if you are taking any of these medications long term.
There are no new treatments for severe osteoarthritis; however, osteoarthritis of the low back can also be addressed with medications that may help nerve-related pain such as amitriptyline and gabapentin.
I had bilateral knee replacements and one hip replacement.
I have osteoarthritis throughout and was taken off arthritis medications because of renal problems.
Other than taking extra-strength Tylenol for arthritis, what can I do for the pain.
Changing weather fronts cause more pain now that I'm much older.
I am an 81-year-old female.
I recognize that is a difficult problem because anti-inflammatory medicines do effect your kidneys.
Use of topical anti-inflammatory gels and patches can be effective and not affect your kidney function.
These are prescription medications.
I had my right knee replaced on January 12, 2017.
My recovery was remarkably pain free and ahead of schedule, re: flexibility, etc.
I did therapy religiously and was close to abandoning the cane by March.
In early March, I began having sharp pains in my right hip.
I had bursitis in that hip prior to surgery and thought it had returned.
It turns out it is the IT band.
The surgeon says nothing other than physical therapy can help because medications (cortisone, etc.) may cause infection in the new knee.
It is now May, and I have only occasional periods of relief from pain.
(That’s mostly due to 2/3 Aleve/day.)
Perhaps because of the pain, I am over sensitive.
Is IT band pain something that needs to go away in its own good time?
I continue assigned PT.
Visits to a chiropractor give some relief.
The situation is depressing and frustrating. Generally, the treatment of an IT band issue is physical therapy.
Unfortunately, you are trying to recover from a major knee operation at the same time.
That can make treatment of the IT band issue a longer process.
Once your three months out from knee replacement, the risk of infection from a steroid injection into the IT band should go down, and that would be an option now.
There are some topical anti-inflammatories such as Voltaren Gel and Pennsaid that are also very good for IT band issues.
These are both prescriptions. Five months ago, I had a knee procedure to reduce pain after Aleve and physical therapy did not help.
An MRI indicated I had a lateral meniscus tear.
My surgeon did knee arthroscopy, partial lateral meniscectomy and chondroplasty of the patella.
I did physical therapy since the surgery.
The recovery estimate was four to six weeks.
Twenty weeks later, the knee pain is still higher than before surgery.
After two months, we tried Mobic but had NO success.
After three months, we tried a steroid shot, which failed to help.
An MRI done four weeks ago did not reveal any issues (except a popliteal cyst).
The surgeon claims that the pain is a result of inflammation/arthritis, and recovery with that takes longer than usual.
I got a second opinion, and the other surgeon told me he does not see any inflammation, and my knee is just weak and I need to strengthen it.
Is there any way to rule out the inflammation theory considering the fact that traditional treatments (steroid shot, Mobic and Voltaren Gel) have failed?
In your opinion, what causes the increased pain?
If you are worried about continued inflammation, you can get another MRI.
If steroid injections didn't help you, then a gel injection with something like a series of Euflexxa injections would be the next step.
I had a total knee replacement (TKR) four years ago, and although there is no pain like before TKR, the knee now feels as if there is a 20-pound weight tied to it.
It is like having a tight clamp around the joint.
The knee otherwise is quite flexible.
There really is no corrective surgery.
Sometimes, a feeling like this can be a sign of quadriceps muscle weakness, which can be treated with a refresher course of physical therapy.
My husband had two knee replacements and a hip replacement.
He just now had another knee surgery for a revision because something broke in the former knee replacement.
He states that he has pain in his knees all the time even though they have been replaced.
Is there a reason for that?
I have bad knees, too, and have been putting off any knee replacement surgery because of what he has told me.
I was diagnosed a year ago with breast cancer, and after radiation, I was put on anastrazole.
This medication is a nightmare for me because it causes extreme pain in all of my joints.
I would go for injections every six months for my knees to eliminate my knee pain, but since I am on this medication the pain comes back much sooner than the allotted six month cycle.
Is there something I can do that would help alleviate some of this joint pain?
For your husband, the results after repeated total knee operations unfortunately are not as satisfying as most people would like.
A knee replacement doesn't make your knee new or normal, or perfect.
Most people still have occasional aching pain even after successful knee surgeries.
After a revision it can take up to two years to reach maximum medical improvement.
In the meantime, continue therapy exercises.
For you, the recommendation is steroid injections, hyaluronic injections, topical gels, oral NSAIDS, physical therapy and surgery when you cannot tolerate the pain any longer.
I was diagnosed with MCTD: scleroderma, lupus (SLE), fibromyalgia, a severe spine diagnosis and a whole host of other diagnoses.
I am a very complex case.
I have A LOT of joint pain, swelling, redness, etc.
I've tried many medications, and as I progress, I need stronger anti-inflammatory medications.
I’m currently on meloxicam.
My rheumatologist has suggested rituxin, but also left Xeljanz and Areva as options.
It's my decision as to which medication to try.
Or would you recommend something else entirely?
My joint pain is intolerable.
Yours appears to be a very complex case. The medications that have been suggested to you are immunosuppressants, which lower the immune system and can have many adverse effects.
It is very important to clarify your diagnosis because this will determine the best treatment for you.
A full medical history and examination is also necessary because this will also need to be taken into account to determine your treatment.
What is the daily effective dose for an adult male for sulfasalazine?
The dose depends on the disease being treated, your kidney function/liver function/blood counts, your weight and other medications being used.
In general, the dose for an adult male is between 1000mg twice daily and 2000mg twice daily.
You should be getting regular monitoring blood tests if you are taking sulfasalazine. I have been receiving monthly infusions of Orencia for more than five years for rheumatoid arthritis.
Would you advise ceasing those infusions and trying an oral treatment?
I take 200 mg of Plaquenil Sulfate twice daily.
I have had very few flare-ups.
I would like to avoid the threat of side effects from Orencia.
I am a 77-year-old male.
I had prostate cancer, which was successfully treated with radiation in 2016.
I have frequent episodes of skin infections.
Whether to try another medication depends on the details of your rheumatoid arthritis (including whether there has been evidence of inflammation in organs other than the joints) and on your past RA medication use.
There is one new oral medication for RA (tofacitinib/Xeljanz) and several older, but still effective, oral medications (methotrexate, leflunomide, azathioprine, sulfasalazine).
All of these medications are immunosuppressants and have potential adverse effects similar to those associated with Orencia.
It is important for you to gather together your past medical information to bring with you (or send in advance for review) if you do so.
About 10 years ago, I was told I had osteoarthritis.
At first, over-the-counter NSAIDS worked well with no side effects I could tell.
It became necessary to take more than my doctor liked, and my doctor put me on meloxicam 15 mg, which has worked well.
The label said to stay out of the sun and heat, and it may cause dizziness.
I am a gardener and lived in North Carolina the last two summers.
I have experienced dizziness when out in the sun/heat.
Could the meloxicam be causing the dizziness, which lingers until winter, or is it something else developing?
Dizziness is a nonspecific symptom that is on the side effect list of most medications, including meloxicam.
That being said, if your dizziness was due to meloxicam, I would expect this to be present year-round and not just in the warm months.
It is important to stay well-hydrated when taking meloxicam and all other NSAIDS because this is beneficial for the kidneys.
Dizziness can also be a result of cardiac or neurologic disease, so I would encourage you to discuss this with your PCP.
Will Arthrotec help osteoarthritis pain?
Arthrotec is a combination anti-inflammatory (NSAID) and stomach protectant medication.
It can be helpful for osteoarthritis especially if the arthritis is mild to moderate, somewhat less if the arthritis is severe.
You should check with your PCP before using Arthrotec long term (i.e., more than four to six weeks of continuous use) because NSAIDS can have significant adverse effects, and their use should be monitored with regular blood work.
What is the best over-the-counter topical pain cream, spray for knees and joints?
IcyHot and BioFreeze are the most common readily available products. Do compression socks help leg pain and swelling?
These can work for pain and swelling, and can be purchased at a drug store.
I am right handed.
The finger tip in the most joint on my left hand exhibits a slight pain when bent.
Can one have "arthritis" in just one finger and joint?
I have noticed this condition for about three to six months now.
If so, what is the treatment?
You can have arthritis in one finger.
These are very small joints and generally do best with topical ointments and gels, some of which can be obtained over-the-counter such as Aspercream, IcyHot, etc.
You can also take ibuprofen for pain relief.
How about arthritis pain? There are many different types of joint pain and not all are treated the same way.
However in general, it is a good idea to: 1) Maintain or aim for a normal body weight through sensible eating, portion control and daily physical activity.
This is especially important for weight-bearing joints including the hips, knees and low back.
You can determine your optimal body weight by calculating your BMI (body mass index) using your height and weight.
This can easily be done online.
2) Eating a sensible diet low in processed and refined foods and high in fiber and vegetables can help decrease inflammation.
3) Evaluate your sleep habits, and if you are not sleeping well (six to eight hours of solid sleep), discuss this with your PCP.
4) Topical medications e.g., IcyHot, Biofreeze, can provide temporary relief.
5) Consider an evaluation by a rheumatologist or pain management and rehabilitation specialist.
Are platelet-rich plasma and stem cell therapies effective in relieving knee pain?
The technology is still new and evolving.
PRP is further along than stem cell treatment at this point.
They are very promising technologies.
At some point in the future, they will become more mainstream treatment options, but at this time, they are still considered experimental and very expensive.
What are your thoughts on a gluten-free diet to aid in the treatment of RA?
I have heard many things about it to help with flare-ups, but I was recently switched to Remicade infusions and am tapering off all other medications (except for methotrexate).
Could this help the taper?
Would it be beneficial to go gluten free?
There is no medical evidence that a gluten-free diet helps in the treatment of RA or in tapering off RA medications.
It is a good idea to follow a sensible diet based on moderation and minimizing processed and refined foods. What is the best over-the-counter pain medicine?
Tylenol is always a good choice.
If you have pain from inflammation and are not on any blood thinners or have any stomach issues, any of the OTC ibuprofen or naproxen sodium medications are effective as well.
These diseases vary from the simple to complex and mild to life-threatening.
They include bursitis/tendonitis, osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, gout, pseudogout and multiple other forms of arthritis, systemic lupus, vasculitis, fibromyalgia and others.
Access thousands of health articles, videos and tools to help manage your health.
Download a free Arthritis and Joint Pain Treatment Guide and get options for improved comfort.
Interestingly, many 9/11 first responders who had high exposures to Ground Zero for weeks after the attacks developed a sarcoidosis-like condition, which supports that exposures may play a role in some people.
Is pine pollen considered a causative agent for sarcoidosis?
As far as we know, no causative agent has been identified in sarcoidosis.
What are the types of sarcoidosis?
Technically, sarcoidosis can involve any part of the body.
The lungs are the most common site, as 95 percent have involvement there.
Next are skin, with 15 percent having involvement there, lymph nodes at 15 percent, eyes at 11 percent and liver at 11 percent.
Does sarcoidosis affect any particular race more often?
Sarcoidosis seems to affect African Americans about three times more.
When you say based on the type of sarcoidosis you have, do you mean degree, or can you list the types?
I mean the location of your sarcoidosis.
The most common type is lung sarcoidosis, but it could also happen in the lymph glands, skin, eyes and other organs as well.
I have heard a lot lately about sarcoid patients passing away, and I’m wondering what are the underlying reasons for that?
Because sarcoidosis is such a different disease in each individual person, it is hard to say for sure.
In sarcoidosis that is advanced and requiring long-term treatment with medications that lower the immune system, bad infections can lead to serious illness.
In the small percentage of sarcoidosis patients who have heart involvement, there is a slight increased risk of sudden cardiac death if not treated.
If you have chronic sarcoidosis, what is the likelihood it could go into remission with the right treatment?
If not likely, will the medications to manage symptoms leave me with a reasonably normal life?
Oftentimes, sarcoidosis goes into remission without any treatment at all.
In about one-third of patients, it will go into remission after treating with immune suppression.
If you are able to be treated long-term on medications that are not prednisone, you may be able to have a close-to-normal life.
However, there are so many variables that would go into that.
On my mediastinoscopy results, it showed Myceliophthora mold.
I am having trouble finding much information on this.
I’m wondering if that has anything to do with getting sarcoidosis?
There is no evidence at this time that Myceliophthora mold exposure leads to sarcoidosis.
Are we any closer to a cure for sarcoidosis, or can we still only treat symptoms?
Technically, immune suppression cures sarcoidosis in many while alleviating symptoms as well.
The treatment of sarcoidosis centers on suppressing the immune system; however, many of those medications have their own side effect/symptom profile.
Is it true that once a patient is diagnosed with sarcoidosis and it is successfully treated with steroid therapy, i.e. prednisone for a year, that patient still has the disease?
He or she could still have the disease, but not necessarily.
In fact, depending on which type of sarcoidosis the patient has, there is a big chance the disease will go away within two years.
My husband has a new diagnosis of lung sarcoidosis.
Is it safe for him to fly?
It is safe to fly with lung sarcoidosis.
In a small amount of patients that have advanced scarring, supplemental oxygen is needed.
It is safe to fly with oxygen, but generally the airline provides a form to have your physician fill out with details about the oxygen delivery.
Is it just me or does hot weather make it seem harder to breathe?
The weather here has been in the 100+ range, and it really seems to impact how short of breath I am.
It also seems to increase fatigue.
Weather can affect breathing for sure.
Some people feel breathing is better in warmer weather; some feel it is worse.
The same holds true for colder weather and humidity.
Do you recommend using natural cleaning products, such as vinegar and peroxide?
I am not aware of any specific recommendations regarding cleaning products.
Can my sarcoidosis get amped-up from being out in the sun?
There is no evidence sun exposure can make sarcoidosis worse.
Is there any relationship between sarcoidosis and aortic aneurysm?
Sarcoidosis can affect the heart and very rarely the blood vessels.
However, aortic aneurysm is not one of its manifestations.
I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis then 14 years later diagnosed with CVID, common variable immune deficiency.
I’m seeing an immunologist now, and she says the sarcoidosis is GLILD, granulomatous lymphocytic interstitial lung disease.
Are the treatments the same?
Is it possible the IVIG infusions would cause a flare?
The treatment for sarcoidosis and GLILD are very similar, but there are some differences.
The IVIG should not cause a flare of the sarcoidosis or the GLILD.
Does sarcoidosis have any link to RA and lupus?
I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis about 15 years ago.
Now my rheumatologist says I fall under the umbrella of lupus, RA and sarcoidosis.
Sarcoidosis has been linked to other autoimmune diseases such as RA and lupus.
One does not cause the other, but sometimes they can happen in the same patient, which seems to be your case.
How often do sarc patients develop fibromyalgia, and what course of treatment is usually taken when this occurs?
Sarcoidosis is a different disease than fibromyalgia.
However, the symptoms can be very similar.
There are many options to treat fibromyalgia-like symptoms in sarcoidosis, depending on what is the underlying cause.
Is there a correlation with lymphomas or other cancers developing in those with sarcoidosis either from the disease itself or from the medications used?
I know when I was first diagnosed, they were pretty sure it was lymphoma due to the size of the nodes and how active they were on PET scan.
Of course, that sticks in the back of the mind now, and I don't want to find out later that was also present or developed later but not looked for because of the sarcoidosis diagnosis.
There is a correlation with sarcoidosis and lymphomas.
One does not cause the other, but they can be seen in the same patient occasionally.
In addition, they can look alike at the beginning of the presentation because both diseases cause enlargement of lymph glands.
However, if you had a good evaluation and your physician concluded that you had sarcoidosis, that's a good thing.
Does sarcoid mimic MS?
Some manifestations of neurosarcoidosis can mimic some signs of MS. If you are having these concerns, a neurologist should be involved in your work-up as well.
Can sarcoidosis affect possible breast cancer?
We do not have any evidence that suggests that at this time.
Are there any treatments for cutaneous sarcoidosis that work?
Many people with cutaneous sarcoidosis experience a great response to a course of prednisone alone.
If the lesions return with a prednisone taper, then prednisone is increased while starting a second agent such as methotrexate.
Then, the prednisone is tapered off again.
If there are still issues with cutaneous sarcoidosis despite a second agent, then an IV infusion called infliximab is pursued, which can be helpful.
However, it is not common for cutaneous sarcoidosis to need infliximab.
Is it possible to have dermatological sarcoidosis but still experience fatigue from it?
Any type of sarcoidosis can be associated with fatigue.
That is why it is important to rule out other causes of fatigue such as obstructive sleep apnea, as that is easily treatable.
Can you explain cutaneous sarcoidosis?
Cutaneous sarcoidosis is one of the most common manifestations of sarcoidosis.
It can affect up to 25 percent of patients.
It can really affect any area of the skin, including the face, and it has many different types of appearance.
For some unknown reason, it has a predilection for scars and tattoos.
Is there any information you can give on facial rashes.
Mine is red, sore and hot to touch.
Sarcoidosis commonly affects the skin, so this could be sarcoidosis.
As always, it is important to rule out other causes.
If this is indeed sarcoidosis, topical steroids are an option, but oral medications can also be used.
A local dermatologist is having a hard time identifying my facial rash.
Is cortisone topical and prednisone the only remedy for a sarcoidosis rash?
It gets hot and flaming almost like an allergic reaction.
Those are the first treatments.
Generally, prednisone by mouth is very effective at treating a sarcoidosis rash.
If it does not respond to prednisone, the rash may not be related to sarcoidosis.
A biopsy would be helpful to confirm.
Is there any evidence that veganism helps with sarcoidosis?
Even though a healthy diet can be helpful for your health in general, there is no evidence that a specific type of diet is helpful for sarcoidosis.
Have any patients had success controlling sarcoidosis symptoms with a strict plant-based diet?
There is no evidence that a specific diet helps with sarcoidosis.
However, a healthy diet is good for other aspects of your health, so it is very important.
My most frequent symptoms are fatigue, hot flashes and joint pain.
Is there a special diet or recommendations on how to help minimize these symptoms?
There are no specific diet recommendations to make those symptoms better.
However, a healthy diet can help you in other aspects.
For example, being at your ideal body weight can help with joint aches in general.
A good exercise regimen is also good for fatigue.
To date, there is no specific diet that has been linked to improved outcomes in sarcoidosis.
A healthy diet in general is the recommendation.
I have chronic sarcoidosis in the lungs.
Should I avoid Vitamin D milk and dairy products?
In general, you should stop taking extra Vitamin D. However, you don't need to change your diet.
Six years ago, I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis.
I took deflazacort for two years.
What are the side effects of this medication?
Are there any natural treatments for this disease?
Deflazacort is a type of corticosteroid, such as prednisone.
There are many side effects from this type of medication.
Some examples are weight gain, increased blood sugar levels, increased blood pressure and osteopenia/osteoporosis.
There is no natural treatment proven to treat sarcoidosis, but there are other medications we can use with fewer side effects than corticosteroids.
I have a friend with a different autoimmune disorder.
He gets IGG hemoglobin infusions.
Is this ever used for sarcoidosis?
You probably mean IVIG (intravenous immunoglobulin) infusions.
If that is the case, then yes.
IVIG is used for sarcoidosis if the patient has a specific type of manifestation called small fiber neuropathy.
Yes, there is a role for inhaled steroids in lung sarcoidosis.
Sometimes, that's the only treatment we prescribe to control a patient's symptoms.
It should not affect the lymph node inflammation, but it could make his cough or shortness of breath better.
I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis in 2008, and I’ve been on Remicade monthly and 90 grams of IVIG biweekly.
Now all of a sudden, my heart rate shoots up but my oxygen is 99.
I have had heart tests and pulmonary tests.
What could be wrong?
Many things can cause your heart rate to go up during exercise.
It is not necessary from the Remicade or the sarcoidosis.
Sometimes, it’s just the normal response from your body to exercise.
I have what I'm told is Stage II sarcoidosis.
Yesterday, my pulmonary specialist prescribed 40mg of prednisone and 1000mg of CellCept for a full month.
Does this seem like a reasonable amount of each, or am I going to be a zombie or maniac until these drugs are tapered down in a few months?
Those are medications and doses that can be used for sarcoidosis.
However, you are right that sometimes the side effects are significant and can impair your quality of life.
Let your doctor know if the side effects are bothering you.
What other medications can be used in place of the corticosteroids?
These medications are called "steroid-sparing agents" because they’re used to try to avoid long term prednisone.
The best and most studied in sarcoidosis is methotrexate.
Azathioprine, leflunomide and mycophenolate have also been used.
For sarcoidosis that is refractory to all of those agents, an IV infusion of a medication called infliximab is the next step.
I have cardiac sarcoidosis, which was discovered in late 2013 when it presented with Stage IV heart block.
It was treated with prednisone, mycophenolate and a variety of heart medications.
In July 2016, I dropped from 750mg/2xday of MMF to 500/2xday.
Within 2 weeks, the sarcoid flared up again, resulting in even more significant heart failure.
What is the current drug of choice for ongoing treatment?
Yes, it is possible that your sarcoidosis flared up as you went down on the dose of MMF.
If you are having significant side effects from MMF, some other options are methotrexate, leflunomide and azathioprine.
You could talk to your doctor to see if any of those options are good for you.
(1) What is the optimum timetable and dosage for adding MTX and weaning from prednisone? (2) Are there any mineral supplements (calcium, magnesium, potassium, etc.) that should (or) should not be taken during this treatment?
The best timing to start methotrexate will depend on your type of sarcoidosis.
In many situations, we prefer to start methotrexate together with prednisone, right at the beginning of the treatment.
In general, you should not take Vitamin D if you have sarcoidosis.
After 12 weeks of prednisone (30mg daily), I reached an increased exercise tolerance versus pre-treatment, plus my LVEF went up from 46 to 61.
Four weeks after adding a once weekly injection of MTX (10mg /.4ml of 25mg), I have started to experience decreased exercise tolerance (defined as shortness of breath and increased heart rate above expected for exercise load).
Can adding the MTX reduce the LVEF or cause of flare of inactive sarcoidosis lung scarring/mild PH?
Methotrexate can frequently cause fatigue one or two days after you take your weekly dose.
However, it should not cause shortness of breath or increased heart rate after exercise.
It should not reduce your ejection fraction or cause a flare of the sarcoidosis, either.
It is important to be evaluated to see if you are having any side effects from the methotrexate, or if you need to intensify/change the sarcoidosis treatment.
Can a person develop an allergy to methotrexate over time?
Would a rash that doesn't itch on the backs of the hands and moves up the arms along with on tops of the feet be a concern for this?
It’s just small, raised bumps.
Or are these typical of skin sarcoidosis involvement, which hasn't been evident or diagnosed before?
An allergy would be unusual to develop over time.
Rashes are non-specific, so it is hard to say what that may be.
Seeing a dermatologist for a skin biopsy would be most helpful, as that would suggest whether it is from a drug reaction, sarcoidosis or other cause.
My lab results after four weeks of 10mg MTX weekly injections and continued 30mg if prednisone daily showed the following changes in my blood chemistry: WBC was borderline high and RBC, HGB and HCT were borderline low versus previous labs taken after 12 weeks of prednisone only.
I've also developed a large bruise inside my left thigh that has not dissipated much over a week's time.
My MTX dosage was just increased to 15mg weekly, but I was reluctant to up titrate that amount based on the blood numbers and bruising.
Is this normal for the MTX and prednisone concurrent therapy?
How do these changes affect my ability to participate in endurance-based exercise (long distance cycling, running, etc.)?
Bruising could be a side effect of the prednisone, because prednisone can cause weakness of your blood vessels.
It should not be a side effect of the methotrexate.
Regarding exercise endurance, going down on the prednisone dose should help because prednisone can even cause muscle weakness occasionally.
What is the treatment for small fiber neuropathy from sarcoidosis?
Small fiber neuropathy secondary to sarcoidosis is generally treated with IV infliximab and sometimes IVIG (IV immunoglobulin therapy).
Can sarcoid and small fiber neuropathy cause dizziness, and if so how is it treated?
Small fiber neuropathy can cause dizziness.
One good option to treat SFN is IVIG (intravenous immunoglobulin).
I have vibrations and a tingling sensation that wake me up from sleep.
During the day, I am fine.
Could this be sarcoidosis related?
This could be related to sarcoidosis in the form of small fiber neuropathy.
I have an extreme sensitivity to touch.
I get extreme pain for a few minutes, then it’s gone.
Is there a correlation between that and sarcoidosis?
That could be a sign of small fiber neuropathy related to sarcoidosis.
Can you explain small fiber neuropathy?
Small fiber neuropathy was recently found to be a manifestation of sarcoidosis.
For some unknown reason, patients with small fiber neuropathy have a decreased number of very small nerves under the skin.
This can cause symptoms such as tingling, numbness and pain in the hands and feet.
How is SFN evaluated and are there any tests to diagnose it?
Is it caused by sarcoidosis, a symptom of it or just a secondary diagnosis?
Sarcoidosis is one of the many causes of SFN, so it is important to rule out other causes during the medical evaluation.
How serious can small fiber neuropathy get from the sarcoidosis.
If it is treated, will it go into remission?
Small fiber neuropathy can cause symptoms that significantly affect a patient's quality of life.
In our experience, we can improve those symptoms in about two-thirds of the patients with the available therapy.
If your biopsy is positive for small fiber neuropathy, it is more likely from the sarcoidosis than the prednisone.
Prednisone should not cause small fiber neuropathy, but it is important to rule other causes of small fiber neuropathy with your physician.
Small fiber neuropathy can get worse and cause dizziness and nausea, but not necessarily.
I have laryngeal sarcoid, as well as cutaneous and pulmonary.
I have been off prednisone since January.
My voice for the most part is gone.
Do I need to resume prednisone to get my voice back?
You may need to resume the prednisone.
However, there are other options.
Talk to your physician about steroid-sparing agents, such as methotrexate, to see if they could be helpful in your case.
I am a 53-year-old female who was diagnosed with sarcoidosis in the lung and chest lymph only in January 2017.
My breathing is not bad; it has improved.
I have an awful facial rash and sore arms and legs since taking Plaquenil.
Does all this indicate that I have a chronic diagnosis, or is there still a chance this can go into remission?
If you were diagnosed in January of 2017, you still have acute sarcoidosis by definition.
It could still go into remission.
Based on the type of sarcoidosis you have, your physician can possibly tell you how high is that chance of remission.
How can sarcoid in the lungs affect your overall health?
Presently, I don't have symptoms, but I am concerned about how the disease may be silently affecting my body.
For many patients, sarcoid in the lungs has absolutely no influence on overall health.
About one-third of patients with sarcoidosis in the lungs have no symptoms and never end up needing any medications.
If you are having no symptoms, there is a good chance that the sarcoidosis will never affect your body.
You need to make sure you have your basic blood work done that looks at liver function, kidney function, calcium level and blood counts.
Assuming those are OK, then there is a good chance you'll be in the boat of not having any issues with sarcoidosis.
Do the majority of patients with skin sarcoidosis also have it in the lungs?
In general, most people with sarcoidosis have some lung involvement at least on imaging, even without any lung symptoms.
Many patients with skin sarcoidosis have no lung symptoms or findings, but everyone is different.
I have enlarged lymph nodes in my chest due to sarcoidosis but my lungs appear pretty clear.
I am on methotrexate 15mg and still get the dry cough and sometimes when laughing I feel like I have a "smoker's cough."
(It rattles in the sternal area but not deep down, meaning it doesn't feel like it’s down in my lungs.)
Would this indicate the nodes are not shrinking or getting bigger?
Would it be helpful to do any more scans to see, or is this just a typical symptom of sarcoidosis in the nodes of the chest?
Even though those symptoms could still be from your sarcoidosis, they are probably not from the large lymph glands.
Enlarged lymph glands should not give you those symptoms.
Sometimes, it is helpful to repeat scans.
However, it is important to discuss your specific case with your doctor because if we can avoid scans it is always better.
Is sarcoidosis known to move after its primary venue is established?
Mine has always presented in the eyes as panuveitis, causing glaucoma, inflammation, etc.
It's held mostly in check by three methotrexate 2.5 tablets once weekly.
That's all I dealt with up until now (glaucoma tubes, etc.), and my eyes were quiet this year until suddenly the erythema on legs became active.
Sarcoid inflammation showed on lung nodules and appeared on my face as Heerfordt's syndrome.
One extra methotrexate settled all that down, but the sarcoid reactivated stronger than ever in both eyes.
I am going to use the legs as a barometer to determine if it's active somewhere other than my eyes.
Is it your conclusion that I will simply need to remain in an ongoing management mode as I have for five years?
Sarcoidosis can show up again years later.
It is not usual, but it can happen.
If you have had it for five years, then it is likely that you will have sarcoidosis as a chronic disease, just like other chronic diseases (i.e., diabetes, hypertension).
However, with the medications we have nowadays, we can most likely keep your symptoms under good control.
