However, you need to discuss with your treating physician any over-the-counter medication that you use, as they can conflict with other medications you may be taking or medical conditions you have.
I have trouble with most drugs.
What would you recommend for rheumatoid arthritis?
There are a number of options today for patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
We are able to not only give people symptomatic relief, but also to modify the disease with disease-modifying agents such as methotrexate and Plaquenil®  and the biologics such as Enbrel® , Humira®  and Remicade® .
Many of our medications can be either self-injected or given by IV, avoiding any GI side effects in certain cases.
Are there any better alternative for psoriatic arthritis than Enbrel?
My daughter is young (28 years old) and I'm concerned about the long-term effects, not to mention the increased risk of cancers.
There are a number of new medications for psoriatic arthritis, but they generally fall into the class of drugs called TNF inhibitors or monoclonal antibodies.
Their side effects are similar, but they work exceptionally well.
Unfortunately, PsA is a persistent condition and requires long-term therapy presently, as we do not have a cure yet.
I think we have to balance the improvement in her quality of life versus side effects.
Generally speaking, if monitored appropriately by a health professional who has strong familiarity with these medications, the risks are low.
How effective is Euflexxa® , and when is it appropriate to use it?
Euflexxa is used for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee.
Symptomatic relief is obtained to some degree in about 70 percent of patients for about six months.
This medication can be repeated every six month indefinitely, as it is not a corticosteroid.
We use it when traditional anti-inflammatories, injectable steroids and physical therapy have not been successful.
How is arthritis diagnosed?
Are there definitive tests that can say for sure the problem is arthritis?
Is there anything that can be done to slow it down?
The pain prevents a normal "curl" exercise with a hand weight (palm up), but not an alternative position with my thumb up.
Could this be arthritis or "tennis elbow," whatever that is?
If that pain is on the outside aspect of your elbow, it could very well be tennis elbow or what we call lateral epicondylitis.
If the pain is on the inside of the elbow, this could be medial epicondylitis or golfer's elbow.
Either way, this would require an examination by your physician.
Treatment could include an injection of a cortisone preparation and physical therapy.
Only rarely is surgery indicated.
How can I know which of the more than 50 types of arthritis I have?
A thorough evaluation with a rheumatologist would be beneficial.
My mother is now unable to lift her leg high enough to get into the car.
It doesn't cause pain, she is just no longer able to do it.
Could it be a result of the arthritis in her knee?
Yes it could be arthritis, but the fact that she has no pain is of some concern.
Which of the alternative "natural" treatments, if any , have the best potential for treating osteoarthritis, e.g., supplements, laser, etc?
There are no bonafide natural treatments that have been demonstrated to clearly impact the course of osteoarthritis.
However, given the relatively low risk of side effects, I try it for six to eight weeks in my patients.
If it gives them relief, I will continue it; but if not, we will try more traditional medications.
Can you give me some insight as to whether certain foods cause inflammation and, therefore, heighten the arthritic condition?
This is a very popular topic.
Can bursitis in the shoulder go away on its own?
Our body's potential for healing is truly amazing, but oftentimes, the use of physical therapy or an injection of cortisone can help the bursitis resolve sooner.
Is there more than "association" with psoriatic arthritis and pulmonary embolus?
I am wondering if I need anticoagulants for life?
I did have emboli about months after PsA.
With respect to the length of time you require anticoagulation, much depends on your other medical conditions, previous history of blood clots and present medical issues apart from the PsA.
I am a pulmonary sarcoid patient who has also been dealing with arthritis pain for years.
Throughout the years, I have been told I have many forms of arthritis including psoriatic, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis and sarcoid arthritis.
Could you please touch on the different forms, and of great interest to me is the sarcoid arthritis.
I have been on prednisone for 23 years, which of course has wreaked havoc on my bones.
I've had injections and use opiates including Vicodin®  and Opana® .
Any other suggestions are appreciated.
We have a sarcoidosis chat scheduled in October, and I am waiting for further information and the promo.
Because of the interest in sarcoid arthritis, I will try to find a specialist to speak to that during the chat in October.
I have rheumatoid arthritis and sarcoidosis and am 63 years old.
Medications for both include prednisone (<15mg now), methotrexate (25mg/week) and Remicade (every six weeks).
Twice daily I take non-prescription anti-inflammation supplements: glucosamine sulfate (1000mg), MSM (1000mg) and tart cherry extract (465mg).
I am paralyzed at T9 from sarcoidosis and living independently using a wheelchair, which puts tremendous strain on my upper joints.
For neuropathic pain, I take R-alpha lipoic acid (300mg twice daily).
I also take baclofen (20mg twice daily) for spasms, not more, so I can use spasticity for standing transfers.
But I take nothing specifically for joint pain, which is becoming life-limiting.
My knees were very deteriorated before paralysis in 2009, and sarcoidosis caused a particular type of arthritis in my knees and ankles.
On October 21, 2015, we will be doing a sarcoidosis chat.
Osteopenia is a T-score of -1.0 to -2.5, about a decline of 10 percent to 25 percent from peak bone mass.
Osteoporosis is a T-score lower than -2.5, about 25 percent below peak bone mass.
The peak bone mass is based on 300-400 normals in the bone density machine’s database (not your peak bone mass since that is unknown.)
I was wondering what the difference is between osteopenia and osteoporosis?
Osteopenia and osteoporosis are on the same spectrum of bone thinning.
Osteopenia is at the spectrum of early bone thinning.
The bones become more porous and can be at increased risk for fracture.
When the bone density is very low, the osteoporosis range, the stability of the bone is markedly compromised, which can increase risk for fracture and warrants therapy.
We use the bone density scan to evaluate bone density by T scores, which can be used in our definition.
A T score of -1.1 to -2.4 is considered osteopenia.
A T score that is less than and equal to -2.5 is considered osteoporosis.
A normal T score is greater than -1.1.
For a compression fracture in the spine (if there was not a significant trauma), this could warrant a clinical diagnosis of osteoporosis.
What is the typical progression of this disease?
In a prior bone scan, osteopenia was indicated in my left hip.
On the results of a recent scan, the left hip is not mentioned as a low density area; however, the femoral neck and lower lumbar region are?
Can it become better in one area and decline in others?
We may see cases where there is improvement in one area and a decline in another.
Often, the spine may show early decline in bone density compared to the hip.
Unfortunately, arthritis can skew the results of the bone density test.
For example, if a patient starts exercising and takes supplements of calcium citrate and vitamin D3, will the bone density increase or does it only decrease the rate of disease progression?
You can gain bone mass with treatment.
Calcium and vitamin D and exercise alone usually result is stable bone mass.
With the approved drugs you can increase bone mass, with bisphosphonates usually about 7 percent in three years.
Six years of treatment with Prolia®  can increase bone mass 15 percent.
When is the greatest loss of bone density for the majority of women?
Is it right at menopause, the first year after or five years after that?
Twenty percent of women at menopause can lose up to 5 percent per year for about six years.
This period is usually the time of most rapid loss in the absence of some disease that can accelerate bone loss.
If I eat right, take supplements and work out five to six times a week, why would my bone density test come back bad?
There are many other factors that can lead to bone thinning.
You may have had smaller bones to begin with if you have a small body frame.
There are secondary reasons to have bone loss, including medications such as (heartburn medication-proton pump inhibitors, steroids) or poor absorption.
Females are at risk of increased bone loss after menopause due to lack of estrogen.
I would recommend that you speak with a specialist to evaluate your bone loss further.
Keep up the good work with the diet and exercise!
What's the relationship between osteoporosis and shrinking in height and a hunched back?
Patients may lose height, or develop that typical curved hump in the back (kyphosis) if they have osteoporosis.
This is due to thinning of the bone, which causes compression of the actual disc height.
With all osteoporosis treatments you need to take adequate calcium and vitamin D. The medications are not calcium, and this mineral is the essential building block of bone.
Vitamin D is needed to absorb and incorporate calcium in bone.
In general, you can absorb more than 600mg of calcium in a dose, so for doses higher than that, splitting the dose is required.
Calcium carbonate needs acid to be efficiently absorbed, so taking it with food is best (food stimulates stomach acid).
Calcium citrate can be taken on an empty stomach since acid is not required for absorption.
Bone densities are generally done every two years.
If you are on steroids or have a condition called hyperparathyroidism, then the bone density is done every year.
I heard that people with mitral stenosis could not exceed with calcium therapy.
Instead of calcium, what do you recommend?
Mitral stenosis is a condition of narrowing of the heart valve sometimes due to plaque and calcification.
There is a concern of excessive calcium intake and deposition of the calcium within the arteries.
We always recommend patients get dietary sources of calcium first, if possible, from food sources including milk, yogurt and green leafy vegetables.
If you are unable to get enough calcium in your diet, you can make up the difference by adding calcium oral supplementation.
Your goal should be a total of 1200-1500mg of calcium daily in divided doses.
Excessive calcium can be harmful to you.
Are calcium crystals in the knee from pseudogout at all related/affected by calcium intake?
No, they usually are not, although patients with hyperparathyroidism are predisposed to pseudogout so there is a relationship in this case.
In general, you do not have to worry about calcium if you have pseudogout.
What is the current thinking on how much calcium to take, and what kind is best absorbed?
Also, what about strontium?
I've heard a lot about it lately.
We recommend 1200-1500 mg of calcium daily in divided doses.
We often recommend dietary sources of calcium first.
If you are unable to get enough calcium in your diet, you can make the difference up with calcium supplementation.
There are different formulations that are available for oral calcium supplementation, including carbonate and citrate.
The advantage of calcium citrate is that it can be taken with or without food.
At this time it is not regularly used for treatment of osteoporosis in the United States.
There's much conflicting information about how much (and even whether) calcium is needed when you have osteoporosis.
Of course, the most common recommendation is 1300 (for elderly osteoporotic women).
However, some authorities suggest that taking calcium as a supplement does more damage than taking none, regardless of the amount in the diet.
Norwegians have the highest rate of osteoporosis in the world and also have the highest dietary daily intake of calcium in the world.
What is your opinion on this confusion?
The RDA is 1200-1500mg.
If your intake is below 800mg, you usually start pulling calcium out of your bones to supply your body’s calcium need.
What is the current thinking about nutrition and bone density?
Is there concern about overprescribing calcium without enough vitamin D & K2?
How significant is magnesium and other minerals as part of the big picture?
Nutrition is important, especially adequate calcium and vitamin D. Other minerals, like magnesium, may also be important for calcium absorption.
We may be overprescribing calcium.
The doctor should take a diet history and add supplements, if needed, to get to an intake of 1200-1500 mg per day.
If I don't consume enough calcium in my daily food intake, is consuming "calcium enriched" products (certain orange juices) better than taking calcium supplements (Os-cal®  etc.)?
This is not definitive but when patients ask me about this I try to steer then to food-based calcium.
What dosage of supplemental calcium do you recommend?
The RDA for calcium is 1200-1500mg.
You need to know how much you get in your diet.
You can go to the web to get a form to estimate dietary intake.
If you get 1200mg in your diet, you don't need any supplement.
Does taking calcium with vitamin D help with osteoporosis?
Calcium is one of the essential building blocks/minerals needed during bone formation to help maintain the strength of your bones.
Adequate vitamin D is needed to help with calcium absorption.
These are essential for everyone.
They alone are not considered therapy for the treatment of osteoporosis.
What are the best weight bearing exercises to do to build bone density?
Also lifting small weights under proper supervision is good for the bones.
I want to know about the risks and benefits of using a weighted vest during exercise.
Adding some type of weight increases body weight and increases the force with each step – thus increase weight bearing.
As long as you can add weight and stay balanced without a risk for falling, this is a good idea.
Don’t overdo the weights, do what is comfortable for you.
Generally yes, just tell the instructor you have osteoporosis.
You will want to avoid certain exercises that put a strain on the spine, such as trunk flexion against resistance.
I wear a 10-pound weight vest for at least one hour five days a week.
I weigh 112 pounds.
Is this a good way to build bone mass in my spine?
Anything that increases weight bearing helps.
Heel strike activity is the best, and a bit of added weight should provide additional benefit.
Remember that exercise can only increase bone mass 1 percent to 2 percent at most.
But lack of exercise can sometimes result in large losses.
I took Fosamax for three years then stopped because my mother suffered a fractured femur and osteonecrosis as a result of taking Fosamax for years.
What are the best weight bearing exercises to increase bone mass in place of taking drugs?
Heel strike activity, such as walking, is the best, but you can't increase bone mass more than 1 percent to 2 percent.
Can you suggest a website (or program) that has an exercise program (such as weights and stretching) that's safe for osteoporosis patients?
Go to the NOF (National Osteoporosis Foundation) website and it will direct you to a good place.
How often are men tested for osteoporosis?
Should it be routine or merely symptomatic?
We recommend that men be screened for osteoporosis starting at the age of 70 or if they have risk factors, such as a history of stress fracture or long-term steroid use.
How does a person's body size effect the accuracy of the bone density scan results.
I have heard if you are a small person (120 pounds, 5'2"), there might be a lower reporting of density than what would be most accurate.
Also, how does weight loss or weight gain of five to 10 pounds affect bone density results?
Small bones and small people may have lower bone density based on a size effect.
I am not sure how large the effect is in adults.
It is bigger in children (but we rarely measure them).
A change of five to 10 pounds will not affect the bone density.
What have we learned over these decades of bone density scanning?
As far as post-menopausal regularity of scanning, should it be bi-yearly or less?
What have you learned about effects of celiac disease on bone density?
My celiac disease was discovered due to my first bone density scan.
It seemed my lower numbers were due to celiac, and the endocrinologist didn't think other treatments would benefit.
We have learned that the information we obtain from bone density testing can predict the strength of your bones and risk for fracture.
We recommend screening every two years in patients diagnosed with osteopenia or osteoporosis.
If someone has increased risk factors, or is on medication that can increase progression of bone breakdown (such as oral steroids), we recommend once yearly screening.
Celiac disease has been shown to be a secondary cause of osteoporosis.
This is due to gluten intolerance from food, which affects the bowel’s absorption of calcium and vitamin D. This leads to the insufficient building blocks to help build your bones.
The first steps in treating low bone density would be to correct the underlying condition and follow a gluten free diet.
Also, make sure you are getting enough calcium and vitamin D in your diet.
You may not need therapy if your bones show improvement, but you should continue to be monitored closely.
I am currently 41 years old and was diagnosed with osteoporosis three years ago.
I've been on Fosamax for a year now and understand that this treatment is time limited.
Five years is the limit, right?
If that's the case, then I'll be finished by age 45.
I already have a compression fracture in my spine, so I'm concerned about prevention.
Unfortunately, you are very young to be diagnosed with severe osteoporosis.
It is important to be evaluated for secondary causes that may have put you at increased risk for osteoporosis.
There is no strict time limit for how long you should stay on therapy.
It is based on your response to therapy and also the severity of your disease.
If you have shown good response to therapy with improving bone density tests and stable bone turnover markers, a drug holiday may be indicated in the future.
During this time, the bones will still be protected because the half-life of the medication works in your bones for a longer time.
Continue to focus on your dietary supplementation with calcium and vitamin D, as well as your balance and weight bearing exercises.
Are generic medications just as good ?
Should I be seen by a specialist regarding my treatment for osteopenia?
I am almost 70, exercise six days a week for over an hour, am in very good shape physically but my bone density still went down.
I was on aromatase inhibitors for five years after my breast cancer surgery.
I am cancer free now for 10 years.
My past history includes anorexia and bulimia in my 30's.
I don't use caffeine and I take calcium (whole food organic pdt.) daily.
I'm not sure what else I can do to improve my bone density.
The medication I'm taking is atorvastatin 20mg.
It sounds like you are doing a great job with your diet and exercise regimen.
Unfortunately, you may have had smaller bones to begin with, and after menopause the rate of breakdown of bone is initially at a higher rate.
The medication that you mentioned is for cholesterol lowering.
If you are still losing bone and are not on therapy, I would recommend further evaluation with a bone specialist and/or women’s health specialist to evaluate and treat your bones.
What type of treatment would you recommend for a 59 year-old female with a T-score for L1-L4 that is -1.5 and a T-score for the total left femur of -2.8?
The patient currently does a weight training routine, takes calcium 1200mg daily and vitamin D 2000 units daily.
The patient is not interested in oral bisphosphonates.
If you check your fracture risk (using FRAX), you will probably be in a high risk group (10-year hip fracture risk >3 percent).
Most doctors would treat you.
If you do not want a bisphosphonate, then the only other agents are Prolia or Forteo.
At your age and T-score, most likely Prolia.
I am 75 years old and took Miacalcin®  for years for osteoporosis.
The disease appeared stabilized.
However, my doctor took me off it about two years ago.
I have tried Fosamax and Actonel® , but stopped both due to terrible burning in the esophagus area that lasted for months, even after stopping them.
I also took Boniva®  by IV but it caused bad jaw/ear pain.
I tried it a couple of times but it only got worse.
I also tried medications where you give yourself a shot in the stomach; however, my heart raced over 150 so I stopped it.
I have a history of leukemia, heart valve problems, bronchitis and osteoporosis since 1999.
I weigh 100 lbs.
Do you have any suggestions to help worsening of osteoporosis except calcium/vitamin D?
I also suffer from tachycardia and POTS.
Unfortunately, it sounds like you have had many bad side effects to osteoporosis therapy.
Another medication that you have not mentioned that may be worth looking into is an anti-resorptive medication called Prolia, which is given as an injection every six months.
Due to your other medical conditions, it is important that you have a specialist evaluate if this could be a safe treatment option for you.
Is there a recommended lifetime limit on the number of Reclast®  infusions?
We never recommend that patients stay on any medication indefinitely.
Before each Reclast infusion is administered, you should have an office visit to evaluate if the benefits still outweigh the risks of the medication.
Your response to therapy also helps guide therapy.
If you have had numerous stable and or improved bone density tests, you may benefit from a drug holiday.
About 10 percent of patients on Forteo will have hypercalcemia.
It is usually mild but occasionally calcium can be significantly elevated.
The most common cause is too much calcium intake – a combination of diet and/or supplements.
In most cases, reducing calcium intake will take care of the problem.
The idea is to maximize Forteo’s effect on bone formation, which happens early, and minimize Forteo’s resorption effect.
After you finish a course of Forteo, you need to follow with an anti-resorptive agent.
If you do not, you will lose much of the increase in bone mass that occurred with Forteo.
Does the IV bisphosphonate, ibandronate, also irritate the esophagus similar to oral BPs?
Are there any tests or screenings available to identify who might be more susceptible to the side effects of any of the osteoporosis drugs?
The benefit of the IV bisphosphonates is that it bypasses the GI tract, therefore, there is no risk of esophageal irritation.
There are not specific tests that would help predict who will have side effects.
It is important to take your vitamin D regularly, which could help prevent any muscle aching.
What is the cancer risk for people taking Forteo?
My family has a history of bone and cartilage cancers.
It seems a bad risk to take Forteo.
And what are the latest findings about the successes and failures of this medication?
There was no cancer in primates.
In the 13 years since Forteo has been in release, there have been a few case reports of bone cancer; but based on the background incidence of cancer, it does not appear to be more than expected.
If you ask 100 experts if they think Forteo causes cancer, 100 will say no.
Patients with a disease called hyperparathryoidism have high levels of PTH (the drug in Forteo) and have no increased risk for cancer.
There are many different formulations of bisophosphonate therapy, including oral daily, weekly and monthly medications.
There are also injections and yearly IV bisphosphonate infusions that are considered anti-resorptive agents.
There is another anti-resorptive agent called denusamab (Prolia) that is approved for postmenopausal osteoporosis.
This is given through injection in the office every six months.
There are also bone building agents that are used for severe osteoporosis or for patients who do not respond to therapy.
This is called Forteo and it is given as a daily injection.
Depending on your response to therapy, and the severity of your bone density tests, you may be due for a drug holiday, but your bones should still be closely monitored.
Can Prolia be taken by patients with high cholesterol that is controlled by medication?
Also, can Prolia be used by patients who have an autoimmune disorder?
There is no reason to avoid Prolia with cholesterol medications (statins).
Prolia can be used in patients with autoimmune disorders.
The package insert suggests avoiding Prolia in patients on immunosuppressive agents.
Experts take this to mean biologic agents (TNF inhibitors such as Enbrel®  or Humira®  among others).
Are odanacatib and romosozumab still promising medications to treat osteoporosis?
How do they compare in treatment and side effects with the other anti-resorptive and anabolic drugs currently available?
Any there other new treatments in progress?
How soon will they be available for patients?
We are still waiting on the filing and FDA approval for odanacatib, perhaps the end of 2015.
The drug is effective.
The concern is side effects.
Romosozumab is very promising.
Amgen says they may be ready to file with the FDA in 2017.
I have been diagnosed with severe osteoporosis and have had six compression fractures recently.
The only two medications recommended by my doctors are Forteo and Prolia.
While Forteo, the preferred drug, is cost prohibitive, I am concerned about starting Prolia.
Once this is in your system, it lasts six months; if you have a bad reaction to the drug, there isn't anything you can do.
How safe is Prolia?
It does not seem as though the drug has been tested for a long enough time.
Is it effective enough to risk side effects?
Taking Prolia is much safer than doing nothing if you have had six fractures already.
Remember, the side effect of doing nothing is more fractures.
Forteo would be the preferred drug.
There are foundations that provide co-pay assistance for the drug.
Ask your doctor about this.
Prolia is safe with few serious side effects, and in you, the benefit outweigh the risks.
How effective is Evista®  in treating osteopenia?
Should it be taken with anything else to treat this condition?
However, there is not demonstrated reduction in hip or non-vertebral fractures.
So, it is usually used when the lumbar spine density is lower than the hip density.
You also need calcium and vitamin D and weight bearing exercise.
What medication do you suggest for a person who has had blood clots and uterine cancer and is worried about breast cancer?
Evista is a good osteoporosis drug for women at high risk for breast cancer.
But it has the same risk for phlebitis as estrogen, so with a history of clots you shouldn't use it.
The other drugs like Fosamax do not decrease or increase breast cancer risk.
I have two friends who had the two shots per year therapy and had terrible side effects with their esophagus.
Is this common since my doctor suggested one more year of Boniva and then to go on the shots twice a year.
The shots that are given twice a year are Prolia.
To my knowledge, there are no esophageal effects.
There are potential esophageal effects with oral bisphosphonates like Boniva if you don't take them properly with lots of water and they stick to the esophagus.
I am 25 years old with severe osteopenia and a T-score and Z-score of -2.3.
If I take enough supplements, can I change this value, prevent osteoporosis and increase bone density?
You are very young to have such a low bone density test.
It would be important to have a secondary work up to make sure there is nothing else that is causing excessive bone loss.
If there is another cause identified for your bone loss, it should be addressed first to help prevent further bone loss.
Getting the proper amount of calcium in your diet and vitamin D supplementation does provide the essential building blocks to help build up and protect your bones.
Can you prevent osteopenia from becoming osteoporosis without taking supplements if you are on a vegetarian diet?
Making sure that you get four to five servings of calcium a day in your diet is very important.
It is more difficulty to get the vitamin D through diet alone, especially in less sunny environments.
Therefore, we would recommend a vitamin D supplement.
Don’t forget to do your weight bearing exercises and work on your balance.
I have sarcoidosis and my DEXA scans are normal except for the area near my hip, where I have osteopenia.
But people with sarcoid can have normal scans and have a higher risk for fractures.
How can I prevent fractures in my case?
Patients with sarcoid are not at increased risk for fracture unless they are treated with steroids.
If you have sarcoid lesions in bone, they can cause an area of weakness and increase fracture risk.
I have osteoporosis, as did my mother and my sister.
I have gotten reactions to all the different medications so I cannot take them.
I also have POTS (postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome), so I’m unable to do standing exercises.
Is there anything else you can suggest that I do along with taking calcium that may be helpful to prevent worsening of disease?
I appreciate your response.
I am a 50 year-old female diagnosed with osteoporosis.
I have been taking Forteo for one year now.
I walk, run, do TRX, some yoga and am very active in general.
I am hoping the Forteo helps when I have my next bone scan.
My calcium and D levels are good.
I have three to four glasses of wine a week.
Is there anything else I should do/ not do?
No, you are doing the most you can do.
When you finish two years of Forteo, you will need to go on another osteoporosis drug to maintain the effect of Forteo.
To avoid the long list of side effects from available medications, what are the best things a woman in her sixties can do to forestall osteoporosis, apart from load-bearing exercise?
Make sure that your diet is well balanced.
Aim for 1200-1500 mg of calcium daily in divided doses.
Great examples include skim milk, low-fat cheese, yogurt, green leafy vegetables (spinach/kale etc.)
Keep your vitamin D levels up with supplementation (some milks and juices may be fortified with D, as well as cod liver oil).
Avoid medications, when possible, that can contribute to bone loss, such as heart burn medication (PPI's).
Also, work on maintaining your balance.
I prefer homeopathic supplements as opposed to medications.
I am taking vitamin D, Catalyn® , Cataplex®  F and calcium lactate daily (in addition to the calcium I get from foods), coupled with weight bearing exercises.
Will this regimen suffice?
Is there any benefit in taking the K2 vitamin?
We are not sure.
K2 is a medication used in Asia – Japan for treatment of osteoporosis.
My personal feeling is that it is not as effective as medications we have for use in the US.
You did not mention what your bone density was.
The vitamin D of 25 would not account for the fractures.
The level is only a bit below normal levels of 31ng/ml.
Vitamin D is absorbed mostly in the upper GI tract, small bowel.
It sounds like the radiation was in the lower bowel (colon) and should not affect vitamin D absorption.
Some patients get radiation colitis and diarrhea and can have some trouble with vitamin D absorption.
If your bone density is low and you had side effects from Prolia, you need to consider another agent for osteoporosis, especially with fractures.
You can occasionally see fractures after radiation since the x-rays can cause cell death in bone.
This is a difficult form of fracture to treat.
You do not need to restrict vitamin D. Most kidney stones are oxalate (70 percent), and calcium in the diet may actually decrease the risk of stones.
If you have kidney stones, we usually recommend taking calcium citrate for the calcium supplement.
I had surgery for scoliosis about 25 years ago and have a Harrington rod in my thoracic spine.
I was recently diagnosed with osteoporosis in my lumbar spine in the first two vertebra below the rod (L3&4).
Would there be any extra torque or stress on the two vertebrae because of the rod/fusion right above them that might make them more prone to fracture?
Also, the bone scan was only of my lumbar spine.
Should I have any other part of my spine scanned or imaged in some way?
A lot of the movement in the vertebrae that are rodded would occur in the section that is not rodded and would increase the risk for fracture if you have low bone mass.
The lumbar spine is the only region we can scan with the DXA machine.
What is the "Z" score and how is it measured?
I know what the "T" score is, but I see references to the "Z" score without any explanation offered.
The Z score is when your bone density test is compared to someone of your similar characteristics, age/gender/race.
If your Z score is much lower than expected (less than -2.0), this should prompt testing for secondary causes of osteoporosis/or bone thinning.
I have osteoporosis with a -3.6 in the spine and -1.9 in the hip.
I'm almost 75, small-boned, have had a year's worth of prednisone (tapered slowly from 60 mg) and given Reclast.
My mother had severe osteoporosis and fractured her spine.
My daughter, at age 45, was diagnosed with the same.
I live in fear of breaking a bone.
What are my odds (based on this sketchy info)?
With a T-score of -3.6, a history of steroid use and a family history of osteoporosis, your fracture risk is high and you certainly need treatment.
Reclast will decrease the risk by 50 percent or more.
Some PCPs do a great job.
Bone specialists are usually rheumatology or endocrinology or women's health.
Is 0.6 high for immature granulocytes in a normal adult?
You would need to discuss these results with a hematologist.
Some of the genes regulating the immune response have been most strongly implicated.
However, there are also exposure issues and perhaps "immune memory" issues that go into the risk of sarcoidosis.
Your chances of getting it are higher if your mother had it.
Depending on your racial background, the odds of getting it compared to someone with no family history of sarcoidosis range from two to five times higher.
Does this malady have anything to do with lung cancer?
Sarcoidosis and lung cancer are completely separate entities.
However, patients with cancer can sometimes develop sarcoid-like reactions in their bodies.
Additionally, there is a lot of conflicting data regarding whether sarcoidosis puts one at a higher risk for cancer.
Is this disease similar to fibrosing mediastinitis, and if so do you treat these patients with vasodilators?
If there is a lot of lymphadenopathy in the chest, sometimes this can be mistaken for fibrosing mediastinitis.
However, these are two completely different diseases.
Certain vasodilator therapies are used in patients who have pulmonary hypertension related to their sarcoidosis, but these therapies are not used for sarcoidosis itself.
What role, if any, do you think sugar plays in the improvement or worsening of sarcoidosis?
Does sugar contribute to the inflammatory effects of sarcoidosis?
There has been some data in the rheumatoid arthritis literature suggesting that sugar can increase inflammation in the disease.
There has been no concrete evidence demonstrating this in sarcoidosis that I am aware of.
I have patients who swear by avoiding sugar, and they feel their disease has improved.
