With a family history of scoliosis, it would be wise to have your pediatrician follow her for scoliosis beginning now with clinical checks.
If there is any clinical sign of scoliosis, then referral to a specialist and X-rays would be warranted.
Can the medical profession predict when curving will stop in adults?
Now in my 60s, my curve is increasing at a rate of 1 degree per year.
X-ray imaging can provide a spine surgeon with excellent information surrounding the natural history of your specific spinal deformity.
Some patients' progression varies little over a long period of time, and a smaller number progress rapidly over a few years.
A progression of 1 degree per year is in the very slowly progressive category and is unlikely to require surgical intervention.
Patients with slowly incremental increases in curvature can cease to progress at some point, but this is variable and difficult to predict.
Our 1-year-old son was diagnosed with infantile scoliosis in January.
He had his first cast put on Feb 22.
His curve was 35 degrees and in the cast, it is 22 degrees.
Do you see the curve decrease after they take off the first cast?
Also, what are the percentages of the curve staying at a low degree after all the castings are done?
They are telling us around five casts would possibly be needed to correct to 0.
The overall outcome of treatment for infantile scoliosis with casting can be difficult to predict.
This means that it is hard to predict curve progression versus improvement.
We have found that the sooner treatment is begun, the better chances of having a good outcome.
The progression is also determined genetically, for which we do not have a great understanding at the present time.
My wife was diagnosed with scoliosis as a child.
Her curve is now 40 percent, and she is experiencing back pain and numbness in her feet.
I am sure the pain is related to the curve.
Is the numbness also related?
The rate of scoliosis progression is probably more important than the degree of curvature found on imaging.
For instance, if your wife had a 35 degree scoliosis curve as an adolescent and now she's at 40 degrees, there is less concern than if her curvature was 15 degrees as an adolescent.
Curves over 40 degrees indeed have a tendency of progressing over time and should be followed with yearly X-rays.
My daughter was diagnosed with very mild scoliosis at age 14.
She is now 16 and has had no progression and is done growing.
Does this mean she will never have any further progression or is this something we will have to watch out for and have checked throughout her lifetime?
At age 16, with a very mild curve and no evidence of progression to date, there is a very low likelihood of progression occurring.
It may be wise to be reassessed in one to two years to ensure no progression.
Therefore, this would be unlikely to cause difficulties later in life.
How stable are adult curves that have been there for over 50 years arising from childhood scoliosis.
How can a double curve of seven years ago (18 degrees thoracic and 20 degrees lumbar) morph into a single lumbar curve of just over 40 degrees in seven years.
What does this mean for someone in their late 50s as they get into their 60s and 70s?
Yes, there is pain, but little to no central canal stenosis.
It is not uncommon for patients with adolescent scoliosis to develop progression of scoliosis in their fourth or fifth decade.
The presence of scoliosis can put somewhat of a significant increased risk for degenerative scoliosis.
Given the description of the curve that you have outlined, it is likely that a degenerative component has resulted in progression of the curvature.
Spinal curves that rapidly progress to 40 degrees over a very short period of time are at increased risk for further progression.
If the curve has slowly progressed to that magnitude, and if the symptoms are managed well with conservative treatment, I would continue to try to avoid surgical intervention.
When curves rapidly progress or when scoliosis results in spinal stenosis with resultant neurological symptoms (that are refractory to conservative medical treatment), surgery can be indicated.
We try to avoid major deformity corrective intervention in patients with major medical problems or advanced age.
My son is 15 and still growing, should we wait for him to have surgery for his scoliosis or do it at this age?
Fifteen is a safe age to have the surgery performed.
If the curvature is greater than 50 degrees, then this can definitely be pursued.
What are the options for scoliosis treatment for someone who does not want surgery?
That would depend upon the age at which the scoliosis was diagnosed.
In adults, we aggressively attempt to manage symptoms related to scoliosis with physical therapy and other modes of conservative medical treatment.
Surgical intervention is only entertained if there is progression of the deformity, progression of neurological symptoms, and failure to improve with non-operative treatments.
What non-surgical options are there for adults with scoliosis?
Physical therapy with a focus on core strengthening, stretching, and general conditioning can often be very beneficial for patients with adult scoliosis.
Over-the-counter analgesics are often all that is necessary for pain.
What are treatments for adult degenerative scoliosis?
Conservative medical treatment is the primary mode we utilize for patients with symptoms related to degenerative scoliosis.
This begins with physical therapy, over-the-counter analgesics, and -- if needed -- mild prescription medications, typically in the form of anti-inflammatories.
If symptoms are related to neurological symptoms, occasionally an epidural steroid injection can decrease symptoms temporarily.
Surgery is withheld in the majority of cases.
However, if required, it will certainly be a major interventional procedure that carries significant risks and recovery.
Surgical outcomes in patients with adult degenerative scoliosis tend to be favorable in any carefully selected patient population.
What is the best way to manage back pain for moderate scoliosis in an adult female age 44?
Is a chiropractor a good way to manage scoliosis?
Undoubtedly, the best way to manage back pain in someone with moderate scoliosis as an adult is conservative medical treatment.
I employ an active physical therapy program and focus on core stability, stretching, and strengthening exercises.
Chiropractic treatment is not contraindicated, but the benefits of such treatment have not been well-documented in our medical literature for patients with spinal scoliosis.
My daughter has progressive AIS with a thoracic curve of 21 degrees and lumbar of 27 degrees.
We are trying the "alternative," but promising, treatment of torso rotation strength training using a torso rotation machine and lumbar extension, both of which are found at our local gym.
A PT is managing our care.
The purpose of this treatment is to correct the back muscle asymmetry that is present in AIS patients.
What do you know about this and why isn't this non-invasive treatment tried more?
Even though it is not 100 percent proven, it seems like it is something that makes sense to try.
Also, what type of bracing do you use there?
Your literature mentioned the braces were lightweight and usually needed to be worn only at night.
(My daughter was prescribed the Boston brace for 23 hours a day.)
This doesn't sound like the Boston brace, and is nighttime wear enough?
To begin with, what is the age of your daughter?
Torso rotation will definitely cause no harm.
For lower lumbar curvatures, the nighttime brace is recommended.
A 23-hour brace is used for thoracic curvatures.
My daughter is 12, just had her menses.
She is likely in a rapid growth spurt at present and this is the time that a curvature is more likely to progress.
A girl's spine typically grows for 18 to 24 months after their first period.
This is the time period where close observation is important.
What non-surgical treatments are available to a 13-year-old boy with thoracic scoliosis that has progressed from 12 degrees to 33 degrees in only eight months?
The only non-surgical treatment that has been shown to be beneficial is bracing.
For a curve with this progression, I would recommend brace treatment.
Surgical stapling is currently being investigated, but we don't have definitive literature stating it is an excellent treatment choice.
Would you recommend a brace for scoliosis for an adult?
Bracing is utilized in the adult and pediatric patient population on carefully selected cases.
In the adult population, there is no indication for bracing to arrest deformity progression.
Bracing may have detrimental effects with weakening of the muscles around the spine in the adult population.
This may lead to an exacerbation of symptoms.
Often, our goal with conservative medical treatment is to strengthen and to stretch the adult spine with physical therapy modalities.
What kinds of braces for scoliosis have been most effective in reducing the curve?
Braces are not intended to decrease curvature but to help prevent curvature progression.
For lower curves (lumbar spine) a nighttime brace can do very well.
For upper curves (thoracic spine), a 23-hour, custom molded brace has been shown to be better.
My daughter is 15 premenarche.
A doctor told her she could wear her brace less and her curve progressed from 37 to the present 55.
She does not want surgery though.
We are moving on to a RIgo cheneau brace.
Are we wasting time?
Bracing is beneficial for growing children with curves between 25 to 45 degrees.
Once a curve gets beyond 50 degrees, it is likely to progress even without further growth.
A brace may be simply delaying possible operative intervention.
My nephew is 10 and has congenital scoliosis.
He has a curve that is 33 degree thoracic.
He wears a soft brace.
Should he be in a more supportive brace?
Bracing has not shown to be as helpful with congenital scoliosis.
If there has been progression of the curve, then more sturdy bracing could be attempted but with less likely chance of success.
What are the long-term effects from corrective surgery done for scoliosis patients back in the 1980s?
Is there ever a time when this type of surgery needs to be revised or replaced with newer "hardware"?
There were problems with certain types of instrumentation that were placed in that era.
Often, any attempts at correction for the scoliosis patient meant they were placed in a kyphotic (bent forward) posture.
This is most often seen with the old Harrington rod instrumentation.
The patients who had been treated with this instrumentation occasionally had to have correction to the kyphosis that was induced with that surgery.
The most common long-term problem that we see with someone who had been instrumented several decades prior is a progression of degeneration below the region of the instrumentation.
When this was treated surgically, this required extension of instrumentation and surgical decompression of the nerves.
There is no indication to remove hardware in someone who has done well with surgery, regardless of how long that instrumentation was in place.
My Harrington rod was placed when I was 14.
I am now in my 40s.
Will I ever need to have it replaced, and how will I know?
I haven't seen an orthopaedist in years.
Should I be followed?
Full spine scoliosis X-rays would give us a good idea at the position of the hardware and your overall spinal alignment.
Replacement of prior instrumentation would only need to take place if there was a definitive problem seen on X-rays that correlates with symptoms that the patient currently has.
It is not uncommon to see a broken rod decades later.
The presence of such does not require surgical intervention unless there is a related problem from hardware failure.
I have seen some literature on the possible benefit of melatonin in preventing scoliosis progression in the adolescent who is melatonin deficient.
What are your thoughts on this?
We have long suspected that she was deficient even before her diagnosis of scoliosis.
Getting her to sleep has always been a problem.
I think that it would be absolutely fine to supplement, but I would first check with your pediatrician.
My daughter is 11 and has been a pitcher for her softball team, the doctor found a small curvature and said we would need to keep an eye on that.
Could this be from her training and pitching?
It is very unlikely that the scoliosis is caused by this training.
I typically feel that it is important for children to stay fit and flexible.
Doing these activities should not improve or worsen the scoliosis.
Absolutely and without reservation, I recommend yoga.
It focuses on stretching, strengthening of the core, and balance.
It has been a pleasure and a privilege to take part in this web seminar.
I am a 57 yr old woman who has no perimenopausal symptoms with regular periods.
My periods follow regular 30 day cycles with rare exception.
(Yes, I am over all of this).
I am scheduled for a TVH next month.
How will I know when I go through menopause?
I have had no hot flashes, minimal vaginal dryness, etc.
I have requested that I keep my ovaries as they continue to secrete hormones.
How will I know?
You can request to have hormone blood tests done after your hysterectomy to find out when you go into menopause.
Only if there is a concern about menopausal status.
If you are clearly premenopausal prior to hysterectomy, that information does not help.
My mother experienced alternating unilateral edema of face and hand despite she has no chronic illness except hypertension.
Can this be considered menopausal symptoms?
Your mother should be seen by a doctor for evaluation.
Does menopause differ for women that have never been pregnant or given birth?
No, other than if women have been on birth control pills and/or have been pregnant and not experienced a blood clot, we are less likely to be worried that they will have a blot clot while on menopausal therapy.
The greatest risk of hormone therapy is the rare risk of blood clot.
What effect does taking fertility meds have on the course of menopause?
Menopause is primarily determined by how many eggs you are born with.
I am 35 years old and haven't had a period in over a year.
Are symptoms worse or less when you go through menopause early compared to in your 50's?
It is abnormal to go through menopause under the age of 40.
Not all women who stop their period are having menopause.
Women who go through early menopause are at higher risk for osteoporosis and possibly heart disease.
I am taking flax seed and fish oil to help lower my cholesterol and I was concerned if this would affect anything with menopause.
However some women taking daily omega 3 may have a higher risk of breast tenderness.
When taking calcium with vitamin D in it, do I need to take extra vitamin D?
And how much calcium is the right amount?
Most calcium supplements only have 200-400 IU (international units) of Vitamin D and most folks in Northern climates need 1,000 to even 2,000 IU of Vitamin D3 daily.
The maximum dose of Vitamin D is 10,000 IU daily.
You can ask your doctor to measure your 25-OH Vitamin D level if you are unsure of how much Vitamin D you should take.
What does it mean if you have high testosterone levels?
What are the risks?
High testosterone levels can happen with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) and some rare ovarian and/or adrenal tumors.
High levels can also occur if women take high doses of compounded testosterone products, over the counter DHEA and/or if they get exposed to testosterone products from the skin of their male partners who are on testosterone gels.
High testosterone can lead to acne, oily skin, hair loss, voice deepening, elevated blood count and potentially mood changes.
Why do some women go through menopause early?
Are there any advantages?
It is nice to not have a period!
And it is nice not to worry about childbearing and unintended pregnancy.
However women with early menopause need to be evaluated for osteoporosis risk and for genital atrophy/thinning of the vagina and bladder.
What is the difference between pre-menopause and perimenopause?
Pre-menopause is the normal reproductive time frame with normal menses and no symptoms.
PERI-menopause or menopause transition is the time period right before and a year after the final menstrual period where there may be menopausal symptoms, hot flashes and menstrual changes.
What are some of the signs that menopause or perimenopause is starting?
I am experiencing PMS symptoms I have never had before.
My nipples are very tender for many days, I have bloating.
I also have shorter periods, but heavy, with a lot of clotting.
Also I get cramps when I have never had them before.
They are also a little irregular.
Are these signs or does it sound like some other problem?
I am only 42.
This sounds like a combination of PMS and perimenopause.
I would recommend seeing a women's health specialist for an evaluation.
My periods are still regular and I am experiencing night sweats (legs and neck) but not hot flashes yet.
I am 53 years old.
Is this considered to be perimenopause?
Is there any chance that I might not have to experience hot flashes?
Yes, this sounds like perimenopause and night sweats are an equivalent vasomotor symptom to hot flashes.
You should keep track of your menstrual cycles and visit your doctor.
How long can perimenopause last?
Or to put it another way, what is the oldest one would go through menopause?
Perimenopause, on average, lasts for 1-3 years.
However, perimenopause can also last for up to 5-7 years in some women.
The average age is 51/3 years.
However some women may not reach it until their late 50's.
Having menopause prior to the age of 40 occurs in 1% of women and is abnormal.
I am having hot flashes but still get my period regularly.
How is perimenopause diagnosed?
Ironically, menopausal symptoms are most intense prior to the final menstrual period that is menopause.
Perimenopause is diagnosed by looking at symptoms, age and menstrual pattern.
I saw you at Speaking of Women's Health last week.
You talked about hormone therapy.
Should I begin taking hormone therapy when I begin perimenopause to prevent symptoms?
We usually don't start hormones preventatively; rather we use them as treatment.
Some women who need contraception may take hormonal contraceptives in perimenopause, which can certainly ease the transition and eliminate many perimenopausal symptoms.
Can I get pregnant if I am perimenopausal?
After teenage girls, women in their 40s or 50s are at highest risk for unintended pregnancy.
Until you have gone at least 12 months without a period over age 50 can you safely assume you will no longer be ovulating.
No need to apologize for feeling well.
I recently went off HRT after being on it for about 14 yrs (I am 56).
Hot flashes and night sweats have returned.
I have heard about black cohosh - do you recommend trying it.
Do you recommend anything else?
The lack of good sleep due to the night sweats is really getting to be an issue.
I don't specifically recommend black cohosh as it does not help that much with hot flashes and has been associated with liver toxicity.
You may want to speak with your physician about going on a low dose of hormone therapy as you are one of the few women who still experience symptoms when they go off of therapy.
Many of my girlfriends have said that when they are/were going through menopause that their menstrual flow was so heavy it was difficult to leave home for a day or more?
Is this normal for everyone because I am not looking forward to it if that is the case?
It is not normal to have heavy flow like that.
Any woman who has flooding should be evaluated.
There are many NON-hysterectomy alternatives for women.
Would hormone therapy or other options prevent the heavy menstrual flow?
Yes, many times hormonal contraception and/or the Mirena IUS can work.
First evaluation for anatomic abnormalities and bleeding disorder must be done.
What can be used to increase libido after menopause.
It was never really great to begin with but now there is absolutely no libido to speak of.
Many normal women do not spontaneously have a sex drive after menopause as the purpose of the sex drive is for reproduction.
Medically what we look for is: Do you have pleasure?
Do you have pain and are you attracted to your partner?
Is there any way to prevent menopause symptoms?
Even if it means taking hormone therapy or something else?
There are several options to treat menopausal symptoms that can be individualized to the woman.
Women should NOT have to suffer.
There are many options.
HRT treatments - does it matter at what age you begin taking HRT.
Menopause began for me 5 yrs ago at age 53.
The benefits are greatest and the risks are the least when you start within 5-10 years of your last menstrual period.
If you have symptoms and are under the age of 60 and /or within 10 years of menopause, the benefits of hormones outweigh the risk for most women.
You have a complicated history.
I think you would be best served by seeing a hormone expert.
I am taking flaxseed.
Is this going to affect my hormone levels?
Is there a difference if you take hormone therapy or not?
It is important to ingest omega-3 foods 2x a week.
I otherwise don't recommend taking daily flaxseed or fish oil unless there is another reason for it, as this is extra calories.
Does everyone have to end up on hormone therapy or only if you are experiencing menopause symptoms?
This needs to be individualized.
Menopause is a normal life event.
Some women make hormones on their own and do well.
Others don't and do poorly.
Others are in between.
However, if you are post menopausal and not on hormones, you need to pay particular attention to the status of your bone and vaginal health as these two areas can be sensitive to the loss of estrogen.
My mother had breast cancer, post menopause, at age 56.
I am now 56 and experiencing night sweats so considering going back on HRT.
Is my mother's history of breast cancer a significant risk?
Having a family history of breast cancer increases your risk of breast cancer.
However, most breast cancer is not genetic and taking hormone therapy, particularly for under 5 years, does not increase the risk of breast cancer.
Furthermore, estrogen alone in women who have had a hysterectomy does NOT increase the risk of breast cancer.
However, if you have a uterus, you need progesterone along with the estrogen.
80% of women diagnosed with breast cancer have never taken hormone therapy, while 20% have.
I was prescribed Premarin®  for vaginal dryness.
Will this form of estrogen “trigger” more migraines since I have been a sufferer for 40 years?
As local vaginal estrogen does not have systemic effects.
Are there any non-hormone options for symptom relief?
Yes, although none are FDA approved.
We can use NSRI medicine such as Effexor®  or Pristiq®  as well as anticonvulsants like Neurontin®  to help reset the brain's thermostat.
Many times lifestyle changes can help.
There are alternatives to estrogen for the bone and non-hormonal lubricants and moisturizers for the vagina that can be tried.
I just feel that something isn't right.
What do you tell the physician?
Being thorough is not what I'm getting from my physician.
How do I get a thorough exam without being offensive to the physician?
It is very important to feel comfortable with your physician and be able to get a comprehensive exam and testing that is appropriate for your age and gender.
I have recently had a hysterectomy- now I am having problems and my doctor says it's nothing.
Do I need a second opinion?
You need at least a hormonal evaluation and possibly bone evaluation.
If taking the depo shot for birth control/control of menstrual cycle, how long is it safe to take?
After two years of use of depo-provera for contraception, it is advisable to get a bone density test to make sure you are not losing bone.
With no family history of breast cancer, how often should I have a mammogram?
All women age 40 and older should have a yearly mammogram.
It is best to schedule your mammogram right after your period as the breasts are less tender.
Do not schedule your mammogram right before some big event or travel because up to 1 in 2 women get called back for extra views of the breast, a so called 'diagnostic mammogram'.
For many women, this causes anxiety.
I think it best just to plan that you might have to go back in a week or so for extra views, rather than to get anxious and fret.
Do be sure to always schedule a YEARLY mammogram.
Mammograms save lives through early detection.
Do it for yourself, do it for your family.
My sister has been diagnosed with the H-POXY infection in her stomach and a swollen liver,high blood pressure Stage II, back pain, blood in urine, she has had gastritis, and Hiatal Hernia, and skin cancer which she has had removed from inside mouth, dorsal hand tumor.
What could be wrong with her?
I presume you mean h. pylori infection.
I’d recommend evaluation starting first with a general internist. jennifer36: I have been diagnosed with a mitral valve and tricuspid valve insufficiency.
To what grade I don't know until I go back to the cardiologist Sept 20 Do they have to stop your heart to fix the valves?
If I am 36 years old, 350 pounds and an apple shape with most of my weight on the top and breasts, do you think I would even be a candidate for the minimal invasive or would I most likely have to have the chest opened?
I would never have known this if my feet and ankles didn't swell out of nowhere and I had an Echo Cardiogram b/c of it and I have to wait for the actual results from the doctor.
You really should discuss these concerns with a cardiologist.
I recommend the use of over the counter repHresh vaginal gel-it lowers the pH of the vagina which helps keep odor causing bacteria out of the vagina.
If a woman has a history of lumpy breasts, which sometimes cause concern after mammograms, is hormone replacement contraindicated if there is no personal or family history of breast cancer?
Hormone therapy in NOT contraindicated in women with fibrocystic breast disease.
If women have breast tenderness and/or breast cysts, we may use much lower doses and sometimes will recommend that hormone therapy be stopped 1-2 weeks in advance of the yearly mammogram especially if a woman has very dense breasts.
Most women with fibrocystic breasts can use hormone therapy if needed and in general we use the lowest effective dose.
There are many newer lower dose options that allow a woman and her physician to individualize therapy.
I am 44, am in great health and work out 5 days a week.
I have had problems with very heavy flow the last 3-4 years.
I have done all the preliminary testing (Pap, uterine biopsy, ultrasound, etc.) and everything looks good.
If you take the body's natural rhythm and function of having a period each month away, will the body and hormones figure out something is wrong and throw me into menopause early?
It sounds as if your doctor might have recommended taking the pill or hormonal contraception (HC) in a continuous fashion to prevent menstrual periods and/or reduce the frequency or length of the periods.
In general, this is a very acceptable option for many women (provided they do not smoke, have blood clots or other medical conditions that preclude the use of hormonal contraception).
Using treatments like long cycle pills or actually ANY birth control pill taken continuously (with the placebo/sugar dummy pills thrown away) is an option to reduce heavy flow and/or lengthen out periods.
What is the latest health information on hormone replacement therapies?
There is information published almost daily about menopausal hormone therapies.
What is the best way to test your hormone level?
It is NOT salivary levels.
We can sometimes get blood hormone levels, but the most important assay is what is in the body tissues such as the bone and the vagina.
What guidelines are generally followed with respect to offering hormone replacement to a woman?
All decisions about hormone therapy (HT) need to be individualized.
The new term is HT as opposed to HRT (hormone replacement therapy).
Most naturally menopausal women have the option of therapy, and not all women need hormone replacement as menopause is a normal and natural life event.
However, women with early or premature menopause many times need HT/replacement.
Most women with menopausal symptoms who are recently menopausal are actually good candidates for hormone therapy (HT), particularly if they have symptoms that disrupt the quality of their life.
Midlife is a great time to reassess your overall health.
If you are considering HT, you need to undergo an individualized history, physical exam and risk-benefit assessment with your doctor.
Therapy should be highly individualized and periodically assessed.
What are your thoughts on hormone replacement therapy that uses patches versus the oral version?
There are pros and cons with each regimen.
In my book I have an entire chapter titled ‘Customizing Hormone Therapy: one size does not fit all.’
The use of patches and creams may be associated with a lower risk of clot and are many times preferred by women seeking 'bio-identical hormone therapy' as transdermal-via skin, as well as via vagina mimics more closely how the ovary delivers estrogen to the body.
Conversely, oral regimens may be better for some women with skin or hair problems as oral HT can reduce elevated testosterone levels that can cause hair thinning, acne and a deepening of the voice.
If taking oral HT - taking it with food lessens the effect on the liver.
Some vaginal rings have estrogen that affects only the vagina and bladder - like Estring and some estrogen rings have higher doses that affect more than just the vagina.
Please discuss the pros/cons and myths of HRT?
Do you recommend bio-identical hormones over other types?
Many people over-estimate the risk of hormone therapy.
Hormone therapy needs to be individualized.
Many women are hood-winked by compounding pharmacists that tell them that compounded hormone therapy is risk free and safer than prescription or conventional hormone therapy.
I prescribe bio-identical hormones, bio-similar hormones as well as bio-antagonistic hormone therapy depending on the woman's individual medical history and concerns.
Is it possible that your cholesterol and blood pressure might rise when you stop taking hormones?
Yes, it is possible.
Some women will have an increase in the LDL-cholesterol - the so called 'bad' cholesterol - and a decrease in the so called 'good' cholesterol - HDL-cholesterol - when they stop estrogen.
Some women have very slight decreases in mean blood pressure on HT, so when they go off they may notice rises.
The good news is that healthy diet and exercise and weight management will control most of these minor changes.
Using HT (hormone therapy) to treat cholesterol or blood pressure is not recommended.
I don't want to go off HRT because both my parents, my grandmother and my uncle had dementia for years before they died and I am getting osteoporosis.
I am not at risk for breast cancer and am quite physically active and eat well.
Can you suggest a way that I could stop the bleeding without going off the hormones?.
If you take both estrogen and progesterone daily after 6 months there should not be bleeding or spotting.
Likely the doses of the hormone therapy (HT) need to be adjusted.
We don’t use HT solely to prevent dementia.
Controlled blood pressure, cholesterol, weight and risks for heart disease also reduce the risk for stroke and memory loss.
I’d suggest you see a North American Menopause Society (NAMS) credentialed menopause specialist for evaluation.
Is estrogen, progestogen and testostrogen closely linked to the autoimmune system?
Yes, these hormones have effects on the immune system and the entire body.
In general, women have a more 'active immune system' hence they recover from infections like viruses faster than men.
However, they have a higher rate of autoimmune conditions such as Hashimoto's thyroid (female to male ratio is 50 to 1).
What is progesterone cream used for?
It has been used for women with PMS and/or perimenopausal symptoms.
What do you think about progesterone cream?
Progesterone creams obtained over-the-counter may or may not contain progesterone.
Many only have diosogen - the precursor to progesterone - which only plants, NOT humans, can convert to progesterone.
Do you need a doctor's prescription to get progesterone cream and does it have any adverse effects?
Some progesterone creams have been found to reach blood levels like with prescription oral or vaginal progesterone, so there can be definite hormonal effects.
Even though they are purchased over-the-counter, patients who use them need to be monitored by a physician.
Conversely, blood levels may not be high enough so progesterone cream can NOT be relied upon to protect the uterus in women who need progesterone therapy.
After menopause and the use of hormone replacement therapy, is it necessary for a woman to see a gynecologist or is it no longer necessary?
All women should continue to have yearly breast/genital and pelvic exams.
I had two IVF procedures and was hyperstimulated with the 2nd one.
No pregnancies - we ended up adopting.
Can endometriosis return later?
I have abdominal discomfort and tenderness but I have always considered that to be normal.
Will the endometriosis just disappear with menopause?
Usually, endometriosis, like fibroids regress during menopause.
Based on your symptoms, you should see a physician for evaluation as opposed to just attributing them to endometriosis.
How do you get them?
Fibroids are benign muscle growths of the uterus and up to 1 in 2 women have them.
They may or may not cause problems.
If it is discovered you have 8 fibroids - would you suggest a complete hysterectomy?
It depends on the symptoms, size of the fibroids and the bleeding pattern.
What topics do you cover?
Is it a book that someone in her 40's would find useful or what about someone that is in her 60's?
My book covers a myriad of interesting Women's Health topics from menstrual disorders to migraines to menopause as well as bone health, sexual health.
There are also important comments about nutrition, vitamin supplements and exercise.
I think that women ages 30-80+ will find the book interesting and helpful.
I am 50 yrs. old, probably Perimenopause although my symptoms are mild.
But, when I sleepy legs and sometimes whole body will sweat despite a cool room, fan, cotton sheets and light PJ's.
I'm not sure I consider this a hot-flash or the beginning of one.
I have tried everything but sleeping with socks..
Does that really work?
Or, am I approaching a time to start inquiring about Hormone Therapy?
It sounds like you are having hot flashes and night sweats.
Yes, it would now be a good time to discuss options of hormone therapy and or other treatments.
What are some of the most successful ways to deal with hot flashes and mood swings?
In the book, there is a chapter on 'Maintaining Mood at Midlife,' that reviews the various mood stabilizing treatments and talks about which comes first, menopause or depression?
Estrogen treats hot flashes and is a mild mood elevator, but is not a standard treatment for depression.
Whereas antidepressants like Effexor/venlafazine in low doses treat menopausal hot flashes, in higher doses they don't help hot flashes too much.
However, they do treat depression and anxiety.
Sometimes vitamins, nutritional supplements, exercise, omega 3 fatty acids, and lifestyle changes are enough to treat minor hot flashes and mood changes.
Sometimes hormone therapy is needed.
Other times, antidepressant therapy is needed.
Sometimes both treatments are needed!
