If your RA is well-controlled and there is no evidence of inflammation in your body, systemic immunosuppressants might cause more risks than benefits.
This should be decided by you rheumatologist together with dermatology input.
In patients with both rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren’s syndrome, can you determine which came first?
Often it is impossible to determine which came first - the rheumatoid arthritis or the Sjogren's.
You are right that often it does not matter which came first.
It is important, however, to diagnose both diseases, as the treatment can differ between them (treatment for dry eyes, dry mouth).
When you have more than five attacks of gout in a five to six month period, what would be the proper treatment?
We generally recommend medical treatment if patients get more than two gout flares per year.
Diet changes can decrease uric acid to a certain degree, but if you get this many attacks, I think you will need additional treatment.
Drugs like allopurinol or febuxostat help decrease uric acid and prevent future flares, but you will need additional treatment (colchicine, steroids, NSAIDs) in the acute flare.
What is the best treatment for systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)?
There are different medications available.
Your pediatric rheumatologist will need to assess how severe and how active the systemic JIA is at a given point, and then decide which drug is best.
However, there have been very exciting discoveries in the last years, and the treatment options have improved greatly.
One of these is the blockade of IL-1.
Can you please help me understand why so many of us, young and older, have osteopenia/osteoporosis and so many respected physicians miss hyperparathyroidism as the underlying condition for the bone loss?
Is it because of strict adherence to the NIH guidelines set forth?
I'll try but I have the same concerns.
There are so many different causes of osteopenia/osteoporosis.
Hyperparathyroidism is one of them.
In its early stages, hyperparathyroidism may not have any symptoms.
It may be picked up routinely on a lab test by noting elevated calcium levels.
In the early phases of hyperparathyroidism, the elevated calcium sometimes returns to normal.
So it can be easily missed unless you are searching specifically for it.
A common cause of hyperparathyroidism is vitamin D deficiency.
Usually, T-scores are not used prior to the onset of menopause.
For most women, accelerated bone loss often occurs within the four to seven years following the onset of menopause and tends to slow beyond that period.
I also recommend completing an online calcium calculator survey to determine if you need calcium supplements in addition to the vitamin D supplement you are taking (Google "calcium calculators" to locate one of these) or to make sure you are getting enough calcium through your diet.
Can you comment on the use of FRAX to identify risks for bone mineral density (BMD)?
The FRAX is a calculation tool that has been validated to help determine a patient's risk of breaking a bone in the following 10 years.
It is used only for patients who are NOT on bone medications already and who do NOT have osteoporosis.
As evidence is fairly clear to recommend additional therapies for those with osteoporotic-range bone density, there is less evidence to guide recommendations for adding medications when the bone density falls into a low or "osteopenic" range.
This additional FRAX score can add information to the decision-making process.
Bone density is not the sole determinant in making a diagnosis of osteoporosis, so this is yet another piece of information in making such decisions more tailored for an individual patient.
Iwas using Actonel®  (risedronate sodium) for about 10 years, and my last DXA scan went from -2.6 to -2.9 spine and hip: -2.3 to -2.2 That may be a significant change, but we go by changes in the bone density number rather than T-score when analyzing significant change.
Would Reclast®  help a male, 75 years old, with osteoporosis?
Reclast®  (zoledronic acid) is approved for use in men with osteoporosis.
Are there any bad side effects with Reclast® ?
There have been reports of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) and atypical femoral (thigh bone) fractures but these are rare.
ONJ is a rare association with bisphosphonates.
Available alternative FDA-approved therapies include estrogen, Evista®  (raloxifene) and Prolia®  (denosumab).
First, I applaud you for doing all of the non-medication measures that are so important for bone health, but that often go overlooked, so keep these up!
The medications for osteoporosis are extremely safe overall, although just like with anything we take -- including herbs and supplements -- there are potential risks with everything.
However, it is not well proven to make any decision to stop such medications without a careful discussion about your specific risks with your doctor.
I have taken Fosamax®  for 14 years.
I stopped taking it more than a year ago because of reading about the femur bone.
My hip score is -2.7 and the spine is -2.1.
I am due for a bone scan in May of this year.
I would also like to know you opinion about Forteo®  (teriparatide) and strontium.
Your hip score is low and there may be concerns about high fracture risk.
Femoral shaft fractures seem to be more likely due to inadequately treated osteoporosis rather than the drugs used to treat osteoporosis.
Can we alternate Fosamax®  and Actonel® ?
There is no real reason/benefit to alternate between these.
Bisphosphonates have recently been depicted in news articles as potentially dangerous.
What is your opinion?
My opinion is that they are among the safer groups of medicines we have, but they do have potential side effects.
Fortunately, the incidence of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) and atypical femoral shaft fractures are rare.
My doctor recommended two TUMS®  in the morning to get extra calcium.
I am 53 with normal bone mineral density (BMD).
Is it worth continuing this the in morning?
However, the average American diet is deficient in calcium by 500 mg or more.
This is especially true if you are lactose intolerant or avoid dairy, as these are the richest dietary sources of calcium.
The easiest way to get your calcium daily is to drink 3 eight oz. glasses of skim milk daily.
Consider finding a calcium calculator on the Internet to determine how many calcium supplements are needed.
Also, know that TUMS®  do not have vitamin D, which is difficult to find in natural food sources, so you need an additional vitamin D supplement if you are going to take TUMS®  to get your calcium.
What is your opinion regarding the use of strontium for osteoporosis?
Do you know of any side effects or contraindications for its use?
Strontium may cause more dense bones, but it has not been approved for use in the treatment of osteoporosis.
We do not know if there are future problems by making bones more dense with strontium.
In the past, high dose fluoride was used to make the bones more dense, but the structure was not normal and some people had more broken bones.
My doctor indicated that a past test suggested "osteopenia."
He recommended I take 1200 mg/day of calcium citrate and 1000 i.u. vitamin D3 daily.
Does this sound right?
Should I be worried?
It's more important to know if you are losing bone over time rather than have a single reading of osteopenia, which in and of itself is not worrisome nor even considered a disease.
Certainly, calcium and vitamin D are the building blocks of bone and making sure you have enough is important to ensure you maintain the bone you have.
Besides calcium, what other bone minerals exist?
Calcium and phosphorous are the major bone minerals.
I read somewhere that proton pump inhibitors decrease calcium absorption.
What do you recommend for GERD treatment?
This is a potential concern as proton pump inhibitors (PPI) decrease the acidity in the stomach, and the most common form of calcium supplements is calcium carbonate, which requires an acidity to be absorbed.
If you are using a PPI, you can simply take a calcium citrate formulation instead.
Just remember to look at the serving size, which is often TWO pills instead of one.
Is it possible that phosphorous may be needed as a supplement to treat osteoporosis?
Most individuals are not deficient in phosphorous, and thus would not require a supplement, unless you have a coexisting condition that causes significant malabsorption.
Regarding menopause and calcium, do you need to automatically start taking it?
Having enough calcium is very important for bone health, and as our bone density increases from the time we are born and then peaks in our 20s to 30s, it is critical to make sure we have enough calcium in our daily intake starting from childhood, not just at menopause.
Certainly, it is best to get it from our diets; however, the average American diet is deficient, and many need to take supplements to get enough.
Please consult a calcium calculator (you can find one on the Internet) to determine how much you need in the form of supplements versus diet.
Calcium always comes linked to another substance, and the two most common forms are calcium carbonate and calcium citrate.
Carbonate has more calcium per pill, but needs an acid environment to be absorbed, so not likely the best formulation if you are taking antacids or do not take them with food.
Calcium citrate can be taken at any time, but there is less per pill, so the serving size per dose is two pills.
I read that the percent of osteonecrosis of the jaw and femoral factures was higher with once-a-year Reclast® .
Overall, cases of ONJ have been more common in those who have metastatic cancer in their bones and were on IV forms of such a medication.
Although this is a potential associated condition, it is extremely rare, and less than the risk of being struck by lightning.
This extremely low risk should be balanced against the risk of breaking a bone due to osteoporosis, which is 1 in 2 for some postmenopausal women and as frequent in older men with osteoporosis as well.
I have taken steroids for my MS. I now have osteoporosis but I cannot take biophosphonates because of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ).
If you have actually not had ONJ, you may want to consider a bisphosphonate.
I have had ONJ several times while trying different medicines.
Other approved treatments for osteoporosis include Forteo®  and Evista® .
Some physicians have indicated that yoga practice without medication can help to reduce osteoporosis.
Yoga is a great activity that helps improve balance and strength, which is very important in the treatment of osteoporosis.
However, adequate vitamin D and calcium are also needed.
Yoga alone would not do this.
I have had a laminectomy/fusion.
Do you have any advice on exercise with this?
After skeletal surgery, exercises are usually prescribed.
It is best to consult with your physician or physical therapist for appropriate exercises.
I have osteoporosis in the spine, but also have fibromyalgia.
Would I do the same type of exercise (treadmill=up to 1.2 miles)?
Walking is a wonderful way to exercise and would be fine to do whether you have osteoporosis and/or fibromyalgia.
Do you recommend any particular non-dairy sources of calcium?
I have been diagnosed with osteoporosis in my left hip and left lower back.
How can I best treat this without medication?
Osteoporosis usually does not affect one side of the back.
However, depending on the other circumstances, osteoporosis is treated with calcium, vitamin D, exercise, and often a medication to prevent further bone loss or to help rebuild bone.
It is listed as a risk factor but may be clinically important with high use.
You should attempt to keep it to less than four beverages per day.
I was diagnosed with osteoporosis in my 30s.
My only risk factor is a positive family history..
I personally do not know of any.
What is your opinion of the "Achilles Bone Ultrasonometer"?
I do not know of that product, but heel DXA is used as a screening tool for osteoporosis.
You will see those kinds of instruments at health fairs.
We are happy to have an active interest in bone health.
Keeping your bones strong and preventing breaks are very important.
What does that signify for me in terms of getting pregnant?
Women with irregular periods may still conceive on their own, but if they have infrequent, unpredictable cycles, it will be difficult.
The evaluation is to see if there are any underlying causes that can be treated specifically, such as abnormal thyroid function or an elevated prolactin level.
Also, women with polycystic ovary syndrome as a cause of their irregular cycles are at higher risk for diabetes and need to be checked for that.
If the evaluation is normal, we will begin treatment with Clomid or Femara to regulate the cycles.
My husband and I are both in our late 30s and we have been trying to have a baby for almost a year now.
Should we start to think about consulting a fertility doctor?
Even though the definition of infertility is one year of unprotected intercourse without conception, couples in whom the woman is over age 35 are advised to have an evaluation after six months of trying to conceive.
Women with irregular periods and or pelvic pain, men with sexual performance problems, and couples who are stressed from their inability to conceive should also seek evaluation earlier than one year.
My husband and I have tried for almost two years (32 and 31 years old respectively) and have gone through several tests.
How long should we continue trying for a natural pregnancy?
What are our chances statistically at this point?
It would be reasonable to begin treatment at this time with Clomid or Femara combined with intrauterine insemination, provided your uterine cavity is normal, your tubes are patent, and your husband has a normal semen analysis.
Without treatment, you have about a 2 percent chance each cycle, so it is still possible to conceive but it certainly takes longer.
Fortunately, at 32, you are still young from a reproductive standpoint.
For women with endometriosis, a progressive disease that may compromise fertility, being on the pill may actually help preserve fertility potential.
However, there is no medical treatment for endometriosis in women who are actively trying to conceive.
Due to antibodies present in his sperm because of vasectomy reversal, we had turned to infertility treatments.
We first had two failed IUI’s and then moved on to IVF.
The fresh transfer, two embryos, did not result in pregnancy and we froze three embryos.
We had one single successful pregnancy via FET with no more frozen embryos.
Our pregnancy ended at 12 weeks due to severe Trisomy-21.
We had all the genetic testing done at Magee’s Women Center (CVS).
Our chances were so low to begin with.
It’s really heart wrenching, and we’re wondering if we should do chromosome testing on the embryos prior to implantation.
Trisomy 21 (Down Syndrome) is usually due to the chromosomes not separating equally right after a normal egg is fertilized by a normal sperm.
These are sporadic errors and you are at no higher risk for another bad outcome.
Based on your age and the fact that you did conceive, your prognosis is excellent that you will succeed again and that the pregnancy will be normal.
A complete medical history will identify many potential causes.
Regular, predictable monthly menstrual cycles are good evidence of ovulation.
Standard, basic tests include a semen analysis to check the number, motility, and shape of the sperm, and a hysterosalpingogram (HSG - X-ray dye test) to check the uterus and fallopian tubes.
The HSG test takes about three minutes and can even increase the pregnancy rate for several months afterward.
Additional tests - such as hormone levels, hysteroscopy, or laparoscopy - may be recommended.
The latter two are outpatient procedures that utilize a slender fiberoptic scope to evaluate and treat conditions in the uterine cavity and pelvis, respectively.
These conditions include polyps, fibroids, scar tissue, cysts in the ovaries, and endometriosis.
Treatment options for the specific problems identified are discussed with the couple and may include fertility drugs, artificial insemination, minimally invasive surgery, or in vitro fertilization (IVF).
All variations of IVF are available, such as donor sperm, donor eggs, and gestational carriers.
Can you please tell me what they test for and what the results could mean?
The semen analysis looks at the volume to see if there is a possible duct obstruction, as well as the sperm count and percentage of the sperm that are moving and normally formed.
The normal values are based on population averages and not on fertility, so many pregnancies have been established by men with an abnormal semen analysis.
However, if a repeat analysis done a month after the first is also significantly abnormal, the partner should be referred to a male infertility specialist.
If there are no treatable causes for the abnormality, options may include artificial insemination, in vitro fertilization with ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection - to inject a single sperm into each mature egg), or artificial insemination with donor sperm.
I have had my tubes tied.
There are two options, tubal ligation reversal and IVF.
The former is an outpatient surgical procedure performed under general anesthesia.
A 2-inch side-to-side incision is made just above the pubic bone.
The ends of the blocked tubes are opened and reconnected under an operating microscope.
Assuming there is an adequate length of normal tube to repair, and there are no other infertility factors, the pregnancy rate is essentially the same as the general fertile population.
If IVF really is your best option, then there would be no benefit to having surgery to remove the small cyst (I assume you meant that the cyst was 2 cm, not mm).
However, if this is a persistent cyst felt to be an endometrioma (endometriosis cyst), removing it and treating all endometriosis implants and scar tissue may improve your fertility and make IVF unnecessary.
Another reason to consider an outpatient laparoscopic procedure to treat presumed endometriosis would be for pain relief which fortunately, you don’t suffer from.
The HPV and dysplasia don’t factor into the fertility picture.
When I first met with my doctor, we decided to try four cycles with Clomid, hCG, and timed intercourse, and if that didn't work we would do further testing.
She had mentioned a hysterosalpingogram (HSG).
At the beginning of January (after my second Clomid cycle), I had a positive pregnancy test but miscarried a week later.
Would an HSG still be something to consider if we're not successful with the Clomid in the next couple of cycles?
I suspect you conceived in spite of being on Clomid rather than because of it.
Clomid alone in women with regular cycles is of marginal benefit.
Adding hCG for timing intercourse only adds expense and inconvenience.
I would recommend trying on your own for a few months if your cycles are regular, or resuming Clomid if they are not, then schedule the HSG.
Is there a more effective drug than Clomid to use with artificial insemination?
There are three types of fertility drugs that are used in combination with artificial intrauterine insemination (IUI) for unexplained infertility.
Clomid (clomiphene) is usually the first-line treatment.
Femara (letrozole) is used exactly as Clomid, but it works through a different mechanism.
Both increase the monthly pregnancy rate from about 2 percent with unexplained infertility to about 10 percent with IUI and both have about a 5 percent to 10 percent risk for twins compared to 1% in the general population.
I have used Clomid several times with intercourse and three rounds of insemination.
I never had more than one mature follicle.
We'll usually try Clomid with insemination for unexplained infertility for up to six cycles for women under 35 and up to three cycles for women 35 and older.
The next step is a discussion of continuing the inseminations with an injectable fertility drug for up to three more cycles versus going directly to in vitro.
I've read that Clomid can negatively affect cervical mucus.
Does this reverse once a patient has stopped taking Clomid?
Is this also a problem with Femara?
While Clomid may negatively affect cervical mucus, it may not be of any clinical concern.
We stopped doing post-coital (after sex) tests to look at the sperm in the cervical mucus more than 15 years ago, as it was totally useless for predicting pregnancy or guiding fertility treatment.
In any case, Femara does not affect the cervical mucus.
The bigger concern with Clomid is that it may make the uterine lining less receptive.
I have gone through two rounds of artificial insemination, then had seven fibroids removed from my uterus.
I then had another artificial insemination - all without luck.
Do you feel I would be a candidate for in vitro?
What is the success rate of in vitro?
There are several factors that would influence your chances with in vitro.
The most important is your age.
Additionally, if there are any residual fibroids that are distorting the cavity of the uterus, the implantation rates can be impaired.
Also, artificial insemination without the addition of fertility drugs is usually no better than timed intercourse, so you may have other options besides in vitro.
We have tried artificial insemination three times without any luck.
My husband has passed all his tests also.
Assuming you have unexplained infertility, artificial intrauterine insemination (IUI) alone is no better than timed intercourse.
Adding a fertility drug like Clomid to IUI for three to six cycles, based on your age, would be the recommendation.
If unsuccessful, seek a consultation with a reproductive endocrinologist.
What is the success rate for in vitro?
And what is the cost associated with in vitro?
The success rates depend primarily on the age of the women.
They are also influenced by the number of prior attempts and the reason for needing in vitro in the first place.
For young women with normal uteri, the pregnancy rates in our lab are 60 percent to 70 percent.
A fertility book I'm reading talks about "embryo glue" to help implantation.
They suggest using "particular types of culture media” that actually coats the embryo with these sticky proteins so it "glues" itself to the endometrium until it implants.
Do you use this?
Would you suggest this if the first IVF attempt fails?
However, it really doesn't work well, and most labs - including ours - don't use it.
There are no "tricks" to improve implantation, which is the rate-limiting step in the IVF process.
Part of the limitation is due to the fact that a high percentage of embryos are genetically abnormal naturally, and "embryo glue" won't overcome that.
I just wanted to know if this medicine is genuine and safe?
I’m 28 years old, female, married about three years, have no children yet, have PCOD, got treated.
My doctor advised me to have ovulation pills, T-OVOFAR 50, for five days, simultaneously detect on LH card test to see ovulation signs to proceed with conception.
They are selling a vaginal lubricant.
I can't comment on whether it will improve or diminish your chances, as there are no data on it.
If you need a lubricant, there are several options that won't compromise your fertility, such as mineral oil or Pre-seed.
T-OVOFAR is clomiphene citrate, better known as Clomid.
It is a very commonly prescribed fertility drug.
It is used for women who don't have regular menstrual cycles.
It is also used in combination with intrauterine insemination for couples with unexplained infertility.
We were advised by my husband's urologist that canola oil was more suitable for lubrication than Pre-seed.
What is your advice on this?
Any lubricant that doesn't interfere with sperm function is fine.
These include canola or mineral oil or Pre-seed.
Other lubricants, such as K-Y or Surgilube should be avoided.
How critical is diet to help embryo quality?
Example: many fruits and vegetables-no caffeine etc.
There are no good data to support the concept of a "fertility diet."
It is recommended that alcohol and caffeine be limited and both partners need to stop smoking.
All women attempting to conceive should be taking a folic acid (foliate) supplement to reduce the risk of certain birth defects.
Women at the extremes of weight have reduced fertility, so attempting to get to an ideal weight may be helpful.
Can a female who went through menopause get pregnant with infertility treatments?
Would they have problems carrying a baby?
Technically, a menopausal woman with a normal uterus can get pregnant using donor eggs.
The uterus would be prepared to be receptive with estrogen and progesterone, which would be continued till around 10 to 12 weeks gestation.
Older women are at increased risk for high blood pressure and diabetes during pregnancy.
There is an individual response to each treatment session.
Typically, I would recommend a minimum of one session per week for five to eight treatments total until you reach a therapeutic effect and start to feel better.
Can you address breathing and stress?
What are the indicators that may lead to consider medication to treat stress?
What specialist would best determine this?
Does this apply to children, too?
When stress is causing life-altering or life-threatening anxiety, then there may be a more immediate need for medication.
Medications are needed for adults and children when they cannot function in their day-to-day activities.
Once stabilized, integrative therapy can be started.
Long-lasting solutions can be addressed with integrative medicine.
Children can benefit also from this.
Are you familiar with Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT); and if so, do you think it is effective in calming anxiety and fear?
I have not heard of Emotional Freedom Technique, but by its name alone, it sounds like it is a way to get in touch with your feelings.
Possibly a holistic psychotherapist would be one to consult.
What exactly is a holistic psychotherapist?
How is their approach different?
Quoting from the Zivia Bairey, LISW-S, ACHT and the chat transcript from 9/14/2010 What are the advantages of very tiny needles that are inserted and left in place for a week or two, or even longer?
I have only read about this as a treatment for other medical issues.
Is this recommended for stress and anxiety?
I get very bad anxiety attacks.
I currently take a wonderful yoga class three times a week and recently stopped working because of two near collapses.
Would integrative medicine be of benefit to someone like me?
I think it’s wonderful that you are being proactive in your treatment plan.
Integrative medicine would definitely be a great option for you to explore.
I am a 19-year-old female.
You can consider adding specific supplements to your antidepressants and augment them, hopefully allowing you to take lower doses.
This is something that would be addressed in an integrative medicine consult.
So, what you’re saying is, you would work directly with the therapist to determine this?
We would rely heavily on a therapist to determine the treatment plan, whether it is in an individual or group session.
The integrative physician would monitor progress with follow-up visits.
I am looking for a treatment without prescribed medications for high blood pressure.
Integrative medicine may have an approach that works for you.
Integrative medicine would address lifestyle and nutrition, and recommend therapies that are evidence-based to address the high blood pressure.
If blood pressure goals are not met, it is imperative to have your blood pressure maintained, even if it means medication.
The integrative medicine team will work with you and your physician to have a team approach in managing your condition.
I have seasonal affective disorder.
I also have psychotherapy and use exercise.
All is great, but should I consider getting off the medications or leave well enough alone?
What suggestions would you have for me concerning alternate treatments?
An integrative physician could try adding supplements and integrative therapy and then attempt weaning off medication.
We recommend doing this in combination first.
I have been getting excellent help for my adrenal insufficiency and hypogammaglobulinemia through a combination of low-dose steroids (Cortef©- hydrocortisone oral) rest, stress coaching, and a number of recommended supplements.
My problem is that about 70 percent of the time, taking the supplements is upsetting to my stomach, and I am finding it harder and harder to motivate myself to take them.
I do take them with food, but often I get sick enough that I have to lie down for half an hour before the significant discomfort subsides.
You may want to add ginger or DGL (which is a form of licorice), which helps with nausea.
Most drug stores carry the Sea-Bands.
Where can one get Sea-Bands?
Yes, you may find it available in both places.
The important thing is not to get plain licorice.
Make sure it has DGL.
An office visit to evaluate all your supplements would be a good idea.
Other insurance plans are variable and, therefore, you would need to contact your insurance carrier or human resources department.
Most flexible spending accounts may be applied.
How are stress and exercise related?
It does not have to be high-intensity exercise.
Anyone can find benefits from walking or even yoga, which has been shown to lower blood pressure.
Assuming insurance would not cover something like Reiki, what is the approximate cost of one session?
First, verify with your insurance that it is not covered.
If it is an out-of-pocket expense, you should call the CIM for the updated cost.
I'm looking for information about JRA (juvenile rheumatoid arthritis).
My oldest child is showing signs of JRA.
He is very grumpy upon waking, and he has some growths on his elbow area, his heel, and his hand/finger.
Mornings are usually the worst time of day for children with arthritis.
While they are sleeping, proteins formed as the result of inflammation in their joints 'gel' together, making it hard to move their joints.
Children with active arthritis may have 30 or 60 minutes, or even several hours of morning stiffness.
However, with appropriate therapy, the duration and severity of this morning stiffness can be significantly improved.
In regard to the nodules you have noticed, you are correct that they can be due to the arthritis.
When present, these nodules usually indicate a more severe and aggressive form of juvenile arthritis.
What causes juvenile arthritis?
Juvenile arthritis is one of the most common chronic diseases in children behind asthma, obesity, ADHD and autism, and inflammatory bowel disease.
There are roughly 300,000 children in the United States with juvenile arthritis, making it more common than type 1 diabetes or any childhood cancer.
Are there any known risk factors for juvenile arthritis?
Are there certain triggers (like there are for asthma) that cause relapses?
We do not fully understand what triggers relapses or flares of JIA.
There are believed to be environmental factors that contribute to developing JIA, but these are poorly understood.
There are certain infections that are known to trigger acute arthritis symptoms not fulfilling diagnostic criteria for JIA.
Cigarette smoke is understood to heighten disease activity in adults with rheumatoid arthritis, so it may also contribute to disease activity in JIA.
A small percentage of children with JIA actually have the subtype that is identical to rheumatoid arthritis.
Investigation is underway concerning whether heightened airborne pollution may contribute to flares of the JIA subtype, systemic-onset JIA.
We just found out that my 9-year-old daughter has juvenile arthritis.
We have not seen a specialist.
The first visit with a pediatric rheumatologist usually lasts 60 to 90 minutes.
The rheumatologist will ask you and your child for a detailed history and will perform a thorough physical examination.
Following the interview and exam, the doctor will share his or her findings and recommendations with you.
There will also be discussion regarding options for further investigation (blood work, X-rays, MRIs, eye exams, etc.) and treatment.
We also instruct many families to go home and think about our conversation before making any decisions.
It is critical that families have the time and support they need to make decisions regarding their child's arthritis care.
My 8-year-old son was diagnosed with JRA.
He is doing better now, but from what I read, this will be an ongoing challenge.
Any initial advice/guidance would be appreciated as my wife and I learn how to support our son through this.
It sounds like your son had a short-lived flare of his arthritis.
Our goal with treatment is to minimize or hopefully eliminate the number of flares a patient has.
While intermittent episodes of joint pain are common, severe episodes where a child's ability to function is significantly impaired is concerning and might require a change in his therapy.
My son, who has JRA, has had it for a while, and I keep forgetting to talk to his doctor about it.
He came home from baseball practice the other day in tears because the coach had them run and he got really short of breath.
I wasn't sure if it could be related to JRA or if it might be something else.
When children with JRA experience new or different symptoms, it is always important to consider whether their symptom is related to their arthritis.
Shortness of breath is hardly ever due to a child's arthritis, with two exceptions: 1) they have systemic-onset arthritis, which can cause inflammation of the lung lining or 2) they are on prednisone, which can cause heartburn.
We would encourage you to speak with your pediatrician about these symptoms.
Are there other immunologic diseases in children that can mimic the symptoms of JRA?
There are other chronic inflammatory diseases and also immune deficiencies of childhood that have arthritis as a feature, so they can present like JIA.
Inflammatory bowel disease (e.g., Crohn's disease) is an example in which patients can have only mild gastrointestinal complaints and have arthritis more prominently as a presentation.
Less common immune deficiencies, such as common variable immune deficiency (CVID) or x-linked agammaglobulinemia, can present with arthritis.
Usually, patients with primary immune deficiency have had more frequent or atypical infections in their history.
My 7-year-old daughter was just diagnosed with pauciarticular JRA.
I've been warned of her risk of uveitis.
Uveitis is a serious complication of JRA.
Children should have regular slit lamp examinations by ophthalmologists to screen for uveitis.
The frequency of these slit lamp examinations depends on the type of arthritis, duration of disease, patient age, and status of their antinuclear antibody testing (ANA).
The risk of developing uveitis is greatest for the first four years following a diagnosis of JRA.
Other than diligent screening, there is no way to prevent uveitis.
What is systemic arthritis and can it be avoided?
Systemic arthritis is one of the more rare subtypes of juvenile arthritis and accounts for roughly 10 percent to 20 percent of children with juvenile arthritis.
Children with systemic arthritis suffer from almost daily fevers higher than 101 F, which are accompanied by short-lived light red/pink rashes located under their arms, on their trunk, or on the inner surface of their thighs.
These children may also have enlarged lymph nodes (glands in the neck, armpits, and groin), liver, or spleen.
They may also experience arthritis, typically in the knees, ankles, or wrists.
At the current time there is no way to prevent systemic arthritis.
