Often anti-inflammatory medications will also be of benefit.
If the dominant symptoms are the leg symptoms of stenosis, epidural injections also play a role in the treatment.
If you get to the point that you have symptoms on a daily basis that prevent you from doing your normal activities in spite of these nonoperative measures then further surgery may also be an option.
If you are investigating surgery as an option, you should make sure that the surgeon you are seeing has extensive experience dealing with adults who have had previous scoliosis surgery.
This is not an operation that should be done by someone without this type of experience.
I have congenital scoliosis, and have had several operations and procedures.
My health is generally considered good except for my back.
My surgeon wants to me to have a myelogram and CAT to see if I have stenosis.
If I have stenosis, how long before I have to have surgery?
I really don't want to go through any more surgeries, but I am not sure of the consequences of not having surgery.
Is there a possibility of not being able to walk?
I am 61 years old and very hesitant to have any more procedures.
In patients with and without deformity we operate for stenosis based purely on the symptoms it causes and how it limits their activities.
If someone does not have symptoms of stenosis, there is really no indication for surgery.
I would not do a myelogram and CAT scan to look for stenosis in the absence of symptoms.
If stenosis is present on the CAT scan and myelogram, this does not mean there is inevitable progression.
The chances of losing the ability to walk due to stenosis is a very low unless of the stenosis is occurring higher in the thoracic or cervical spine.
In the absence of symptoms, the risk of losing the ability to walk is actually higher with surgery than without.
Are any sports contraindicated with scoliosis—specifically in children?
What about tackle football with an unbraced 15-degree top curve in an 11-year-old boy?
There are no activity restrictions or contraindicated sports in children with scoliosis.
Patients who have undergone fusion surgery may be limited by their surgeon on a case-by-case basis.
Most kids return to all but true collision sports after a solid fusion is obtained.
A child with a mild 15 degree curve should have no restrictions on sports or other activities.
My 17-year-old son is a high school wheelchair basketball player with a competitive team.
He has been diagnosed with scoliosis with a 40-degree curvature.
If at some point he needs surgery, what are his chances of playing basketball again?
What can we do to avoid increasing the curvature of the spine?
If he has a fixed neurologic problem, such as a previous spinal cord injury, the risk is a little less than if he has a progressive neurologic deficit such as muscular dystrophy.
Returning to playing basketball after scoliosis surgery would depend on how extensive the surgery needed to correct the scoliosis.
If he is asymptomatic, I would not proceed to surgery—but would just follow the scoliosis.
Progression occurs independent of activities.
This means there is likely nothing he can do to prevent it from happening if it is going to happen, but neither will any of his activities increase the risk unless he were to start smoking.
Smoking will increase progression.
Can scoliosis happen during pregnancy in someone with a short torso?
Also, can eating certain foods, taking vitamins and exercising slow the progression if it is degenerative?
Progression of a degenerative scoliosis is actually determined predominantly by genetics.
Certain foods and diet will not change the risk of progression.
Exercise will not alter the rate of progression, but the more exercise someone does the less likely they are to have symptoms related to that progression.
Any exercise program would include core muscle strengthening exercises.
Are there any natural herbal remedies for inflammation and pain?
Earlier this year we had an excellent chat with integrative medicine entitled ‘Using Wellness Approaches to Manage Pain.’
One focus of the chat was on the anti-inflammatory diet.
My daughter was diagnosed with scoliosis when she was one year old and is four and one half years old now.
She has had five Risser casts and she wears her brace every day.
What do you know and think about spinal tethering?
Also, do you think spinal fusion is becoming obsolete with vertebrae stapling and this new tethering procedure?
I am familiar with spinal tethering.
It is still in its infancy and is not yet being used widely.
Fusion surgery remains the gold standard and will remain so for quite some time.
Other techniques need to be validated and shown superior to fusion before fusion would become obsolete.
This would likely take many years to accomplish.
The greatest challenge remains maintenance of growth while preventing curve progression.
Fusion surgery remains the gold standard, but, unfortunately, it stops growth in the spinal segments that are fused.
They are currently being performed in small numbers in select centers.
Sometimes sarcoidosis can be found incidentally.
Are the granulomas found in pulmonary sarcoidosis of the same make-up as osseous sarcoidosis?
While I understand bone sarcoidosis is typically treated by rheumatologists, is the treatment different?
It seems like the same medications are used.
In general as far as we know, all the granulomas in different organs have the same make-up.
The therapy for all of them can be similar.
So, it is less important what specialty defines your physician, and more important that he or she is willing to look at the whole picture, and not just one organ—we call that ‘the quarterback.’
For bone sarcoidosis, probably 90 percent of patients do not require treatment.
When it is treated, sometimes the antimalarial hydroxychloroquine can be effective.
Sometimes we need to use more powerful medications.
Can sarcoidosis be the diagnosis even if there is not significant damage to the lungs shown in scans?
I have significant damage to liver (almost to cirrhosis level), which doctors think may have happened many years ago.
My liver biopsy showed granulomas.
All possible liver disease diagnoses (including alcoholic cirrhosis, hepatitis, HIV, etc.) have been ruled out, and the symptoms of sarcoidosis seem to match many symptoms.
A CT scan of my lungs showed only a couple of calcified granulomas, but I do have reduced lung capacity.
All of my blood work comes back normal.
Does a diagnosis of sarcoidosis make sense for a situation like this?
If so, is there concern that additional damage may occur, or do you think it was active years ago and this is just the result of the earlier damage?
I am a 45-year-old female.
Finding granulomas only in the liver makes it tough to make a diagnosis of sarcoidosis.
There is an entity called idiopathic granulomatous hepatitis, and also a disease caused primary biliary sclerosis that can look a lot like sarcoidosis in the liver.
I would need to see a granuloma in another organ to make a confident diagnosis of sarcoidosis.
A very frequent misconception is that the radiologists' term ‘granuloma’ means sarcoidosis.
What the radiologist is really talking about is far larger than an actual granuloma.
It is a collection of calcified scarring or a nodule that is calcified.
It is usually due to a prior fungal infection, not to sarcoidosis.
So, a radiology reading of a few calcified granulomas generally has nothing to do with sarcoidosis.
My gallbladder was crystallized and removed.
Could that have been because of sarcoidosis?
Later on I had a lump removed that was sarcoidosis.
It is hard to know.
Typically granulomas should be reported in an organ with sarcoidosis involvement.
I was diagnosed in 2007 with atypical sarcoidosis in my lymph nodes and have not received any treatment due to a lack of insurance.
How important is it to have a check up and what should be done?
My symptoms come and go, and are related to muscle, joint, and bone pain.
I control my symptoms with ibuprofen and Epsom salt baths.
I am obese; I am five-foot tall and weigh 212 lbs.
However, I have been eating healthier and walking two to three miles a day, so I have lost 10 lbs in the last two months.
Congratulations on your move towards a healthy lifestyle.
We typically recommend that everyone with sarcoidosis has a baseline ECG (heart tracing) and a yearly eye examination.
Yearly pulmonary function testing and blood work are also ideal.
I have a lot of different symptoms, but none seem to be as bad as others have.
How do you know when they should be treated?Anything that threatens vital organ functioning should be aggressively treated.
Is there a connection between daily serious fatigue and pulmonary sarcoidosis?Yes.
Many patients with sarcoidosis also have sleep disorders and fibromyalgia.
Ask your provider for a referral for a sleep consultation.
I have bouts of extreme exhaustion that cause dizziness and a physical draining that prevents me from continuing anything until I go to bed for however long is necessary.
This can be between 15 minutes or several hours.
My doctor's response is that I shouldn't be having this.
I have it and it interrupts my life.
It makes me extremely undependable because I have no idea when it will strike and how long it will take before I can resume my activity.
I'm aware of my customary exhaustion from sarcoidosis.
However, this seems to be excessive.
Approximately three years ago I had a cyst removed from the top of my head.
When I received the biopsy results they were good, but the doctor stated that I should get a chest MRI because I had cells consistent with sarcoidosis.
An MRI showed a scar or something.
The doctor attempted a biopsy, but could not reach it.
Could this tiredness and other problems like having a fever without being sick be related?
I really am tired and listless.
What else should I look for?You raised two important points Does sarcoidosis cause legitimate pain?
I have had severe pain in my back for at least a year before I found out that I had sarcoidosis.
The pain led me to a doctor who discovered sarcoidosis.
However, my doctor does not think that sarcoidosis causes pain.
If it is the cause, which type of specialist should I need to see to get this resolved?
I am concerned that I am limiting my diagnosis by only seeing a pulmonologist, but do not want to seem crazy.
Patients with sarcoidosis often have pain and an overlap with fibromyalgia, a chronic pain syndrome.
That does not mean that you necessarily need immunosuppressive therapy.
You may benefit from seeing a pain specialist or someone who specializes in fibromyalgia.
I struggle with varying degrees of pain in specific locations in my chest.
Is this caused by inflammation due to sarcoidosis?Probably.
Chest pain is common in sarcoidosis.
My physician says my lymph nodes will never go down—they are all swollen in my lung area.
I have multiple nodules.
Do you think my lymph nodes can go down?Possibly, but they may not.
If you are asymptomatic, I would try not to worry too much.
I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis about one and one half years ago.
My symptoms included noticeably swollen lymph glands in my neck and a hoarse voice.
I have had several tests to monitor my disease and nothing was of concern.
For that I am extremely thankful.
It came at a time when I allowed my daughter to get a cat.
Is sarcoidosis any way related to allergies?
Also, since I don't have any problems with the disease currently, I am not sure which type of doctor I should follow up with.
My lymph glands in my neck are still noticeably swollen and my voice is still very hoarse.
It sounds like you may still have some sarcoidosis activity given your current symptoms.
Typically, most patients regularly see a pulmonologist, but there are many other experts in other disciplines.
A ‘hypersensitivity reaction’ can have a similar pattern to sarcoidosis on lung biopsy, but I would not have expected all your current symptoms to be cat related.
The only way to know for sure is to limit your cat exposure.
I have pulmonary sarcoidosis.
Can sarcoidosis affect the sinuses?
I have had two sinus surgeries, several sinus infections and a loss of smell and taste.
Is there a way to test to see if my sinuses are affected by sarcoidosis?Yes.
Sarcoidosis can affect the sinuses.
Consider asking your sinus doctor to take a biopsy.
It can sometimes be difficult to treat and may require a more aggressive approach to therapy.
Does this disease affect your balance?
Can it cause dizziness?Yes, it can.
Sarcoidosis can affect various parts of the nervous system that can be responsible for balance and can result in dizziness.
My spleen was full of sarcoidosis and was removed.
I also have known spots of sarcoidosis on my liver.
Would spots of sarcoidosis on liver cause chronic nausea and vomiting and flare-up of gastritis?
Also, if my liver enzymes have jumped higher in numbers in six months, but not out of normal range, is this anything to worry about?Your symptoms are probably not due to liver sarcoidosis unless you have substantial blockage of the bile ducts or severe liver disease.
However, it could be due to involvement of the stomach lining.
Sometimes this is only found when the gastroenterologist does a biopsy of the stomach lining.
However, there are of course a lot of other reasons for the symptoms that have nothing to do with sarcoidosis.
My 34-year-old son has severe blood clots.
There has been no medication tried that has successfully prevented them.
He is presently on an injection called Arixtra®  (fondaparinux).
I am wondering if anyone else has blood clots with sarcoidosis as his legs are full of them.
Yes, there are two articles in the literature that describe this association.
One of these reports actually came from National Jewish Health in Denver.
(Jeffrey Swigris, DO is the first author.)
I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis in my lungs over 30  years ago and it seemed to resolve.
Is there a test that can tell if I still have it?
I want to know if I could have cardiac sarcoidosis.
How can I find out if I do?In many patients with sarcoidosis, it can disappear without any specific treatment.
Since your diagnosis of sarcoidosis was so long ago and supposedly resolved, it is somewhat unlikely that your cardiac symptoms are related.
However, to check to see if you have sarcoidosis, it would not be unreasonable to have a chest x-ray (or CT) and pulmonary function tests.
Please share with your cardiologist your history of sarcoidosis.
A cardiac PET (positron emission tomography) scan or cardiac MRI can show changes consistent with sarcoidosis.
I received a heart transplant on April 20, 2011 due to cardiac sarcoidosis.
Is it likely the sarcoidosis will return to my transplanted heart?
How can post-heart transplant biopsies be tested for sarcoidosis and how reliable are these tests?What type of post-heart transplant medicine should I be taking and at what doses?Possibly, it may return to your transplanted heart.
Cardiac sarcoidosis can sometimes be difficult to measure by biopsy as it skips around.
Your transplant cardiologist may want to get a cardiac MRI or PET.
The good thing is that your antirejection medications also may treat sarcoidosis.
Your transplant medications should be discussed with your transplant cardiologist.
My husband was diagnosed with pulmonary sarcoidosis two years ago.
He is a 35- year- old white male.
We recently discovered, through an MRI that he has a sarcoidosis bone lesion on the spine in the back of his neck.
He also has been diagnosed with a conduction issue with his heart, but his doctors do not think it is sarcoidosis related.
His uncle had sarcoidosis in his heart and needed a heart transplant.
Are there things we can do to prevent his sarcoidosis from spreading further (specifically to his heart) and prevent his lung condition from worsening over time?In regards to the bone findings, those are common in many patients with sarcoidosis and likely do not require specific management.
In terms of the cardiac issue, there are several forms of cardiac sarcoidosis.
Those that affect the conduction system (most common) and those that affect the function of the muscle itself (probably what his uncle had).
Your husband should be seen by an electrophysiologist (cardiologist that specializes in rhythm) as we generally have a low threshold to put a defibrillator in sarcoid patients with conduction issues.
A cardiac PET or MRI can often be useful to screen for cardiac involvement by sarcoidosis.
If this seems to be present, then his sarcoid therapy would be more aggressive.
What is the prognosis for cardiac sarcoidosis?The prognosis is much better than it was in the past.
If it is found early, there is better than 90 percent long-term survival.
Finding it early, finding more mild cases and the use of defibrillators have probably all contributed to the better prognosis.
Markers of worse outcome include poor ejection fraction, poor exercise tolerance and high grade dysrhythmias (like ventricular tachycardia).
I have had pulmonary sarcoidosis for the last six years that was confirmed via open lung biopsy.
I believe that I also have sarcoidosis of the lymph glands in my neck under the jaw.
I have unbearable pain there, and the gland continually goes up and down.
I had an ultrasound of the right side of my neck.
I was told that there is no solid mass and that the lymph nodes are not big enough, so a biopsy would be risky.
The pain is driving me mad as it has been like this for several years.
I am tired and have lost faith in doctors who seem to give me the flick off.
This was also the case until a doctor eventually did a biopsy (lungs), although he said it was unlikely that I would have this rare disease.
To everyone's surprise it did turn out to be sarcoidosis.
What I would like to know is what to do now.
If it is lymph node sarcoidosis, would the treatment be the same as that for pulmonary sarcoidosis?
Most importantly, how do I get a doctor or specialist to listen?The treatment for lymph node sarcoidosis and pulmonary sarcoidosis is often the same.
I have been taking 20 mg of methotrexate since January 2012 and I am doing well.
My right knee is very painful and gets very stiff.
Could this be from the sarcoidosis, maybe early arthritis or something else related?
Suggestions on seeking treatment?Sarcoidosis can affect the joints, but methotrexate is often helpful for this.
There are many other causes of knee pain.
I would ask your provider to start with a knee x-ray and then if necessary get a knee MRI and/or referral to an orthopedic surgeon or rheumatologist.
A local injection of steroids might provide you some relief.
I have sarcoidosis in my lungs and lymph nodes.
I think it is in my spine as well because of the unbearable pain.
They just found a spot on my brain as well.
My doctor is in no rush to treat me, nor does he believe that the pain is sarcoidosis related.
I have been diagnosed with sarcoidosis and have extreme spine and pelvic pain.
My CT scan shows defined lytic lesions throughout spine and pelvis.
Could this be neurosarcoidosis?
I am multiple myeloma negative.
The lytic lesions are probably bone sarcoidosis as opposed to neurosarcoidosis (involving the nervous system).
Bone sarcoidosis does not always require treatment, but in your case it may be warranted.
It all seems to relate to pulmonary sarcoidosis.
I was recently diagnosed thru PET scan and bone biopsy, and prednisone if of no help.
Is there a different treatment matrix for osseous sarcoidosis vs. pulmonary?
And is the goal of the treatment strictly palliative, or is there reason to believe treatment (such as methotrexate and anti-TNF[tumor necrosis factor]) -a will reduce granulomas or stop further growth?Osseous sarcoidosis is often an incidental finding and does not need to be specifically treated.
Methotrexate and the TNF (tumor necrosis factor)-alpha therapies would be the therapy of choice if osseous sarcoidosis does need to be treated.
I’ve had pulmonary sarcoidosis since 1994, which is stage 4.
My x-rays have been unchanged for six years, but I've become more fatigued and feel more short of breath.
Doctors blame it on being 50 lb overweight and tell me to lose the weight to feel better.
How can I lose weight when I'm so fatigued and short of breath?
Could the shortness of breath be caused by something else?You may consider being evaluated for pulmonary hypertension with an echocardiogram and perhaps a heart catheterization.
Pulmonary rehabilitation can often help people with severe lung disease get active and improve their exercise tolerance in a safe way.
I was diagnosed with pulmonary sarcoidosis in 2008.
I have had multiple hospitalizations.
Using methotrexate, Imuran®  (azathioprine) plus high doses of prednisone, my pulmonary symptoms are relieved at the present.
I still require a nebulizer two to three  times per day and oxygen therapy at night.
My stomach and bowel habits have drastically changed with vomiting and loose watery stools, but my physicians will not consider a link to sarcoidosis because it is rare.
I have lost an extreme amount of weight and I am considered a failure to thrive.
Can a test rule out the possibility in my gastric system?I would consider having someone do some endoscopic biopsies to look for sarcoidosis involvement.
The medications could also be causing these issues.
If they are the culprit, there are other options available to try instead, such as TNF (tumor necrosis factor) blockers.
I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis in 2003.
In September I started experiencing issues with my skin.
Can you provide more information on plaque sarcoidosis?
What method can I use after the flare up to clear the marks left on my skin?
Skin sarcoidosis can be difficult to treat and often requires some of our stronger medications (i.e. Remicade® [infliximab]).
The post-inflammatory pigmentation often takes awhile to fade, but can be permanent.
In that case, you may consider consulting a dermatologist for recommendations on make-up that provides more coverage than the typical make-up that you can buy in a store.
I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis two years ago.
I have bilateral node involvement and my lungs are clear.
In the past year I have been having one to two short pre-syncope episodes per month.
Sometimes the episodes wipe me out for a day.
I have been through significant testing that has ruled out heart, ears and brain.
What type of tests would you recommend?
I'm so scared its something related to sarcoidosis that my local doctors don't have the experience or knowledge to pinpoint.
Also, do you recommend some kind of follow-up testing annually to track sarcoidosis outside of breathing tests?You need to be seen by a cardiologist that specializes in heart rhythm.
You many need an electrophysiologic testing.
A biopsy is often required.
I recently had a positive ANA.
Can this be caused by sarcoidosis?No.
Sarcoidosis can coexist with autoimmune (rheumatologic) disease.
I have diagnosis-confirmed systemic sarcoidosis, involving the parotid, lymph, lung and long bone.
The only biopsy done was with the parotid.
No testing was done on the lungs which have atypical round lesions but no hilar involvement at last CT.
I have various symptoms and paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT) along with palpitations.
Many of the larger sarcoidosis clinics have specialists available with an interest and expertise in various organ systems, such as cardiac, dermatology, etc.
However, it is sometimes useful to be prudent about how many specialists get involved.
Whether to see a specialist might depend on the specific situation, the manifestations, and the comfort level of the sarcoidosis ‘quarterback’ at that center.
What is significance of ACE levels?
I started with sarcoidosis in my lungs.
Six months after treatment with prednisone, I had significant pain and inflammation in my feet.
An MRI indicated either sarcoidosis or myeloma.
Now I am being treated with Plaquenil®  (hydroxychloroquine) 200 mg twice daily, methotrexate12.5 mg subcutaneous injection, and 3 mg prednisone (in the process of weaning down).
I tried to drop a dose of Plaquenil®  (hydroxychloroquine) and cut the methotrexate dose in half, but the Joint pain returned and I had increased fatigue.
A repeat MRI looked good prior to my dropping the dosage of medications.
I have no inflammation in my feet.
What is best test to check for active sarcoidosis?ACE levels are elevated in some people with sarcoidosis, but not all.
It can be used as a biomarker (something to follow) in organs that cannot easily be monitored with conventional testing.
However, if the ACE level is not elevated to begin with, it is not helpful.
There is no blood test that can really be relied on with a high degree of confidence.
Some investigators look at soluble interleukin-2.
Importantly, the symptoms that you are having may or may not be related to sarcoidosis activity, but could be related to prior damage.
Improvement after steroids might suggest sarcoid activity and would argue for more aggressive immunosuppression.
Is it necessary to continue prednisone?
I already have been on it for three non-stop years.
My nephrologist suspects sarcoidosis due to very high hypercalciuria and very high vitamin D (1,125-D).
He says nothing else causes high vitamin D (1,25-D).
I have had pulmonary function tests, which were normal.
I have swollen lymph nodes in both arm pits.
Do I need to pursue sarcoidosis further?
What do you think about a parotid biopsy for diagnosis?I agree with your nephrologists—this is most likely sarcoidosis.
I am not sure that some infections wouldn't also look similar, so a biopsy seems warranted to me.
It seems like chest imaging would be useful.
Lymph nodes in the arms pits are not very common for sarcoidosis.
I am very skeptical about the diagnosis unless there are also enlarged lymph nodes in the chest.
Specialists in sarcoidosis are very hard to find in my area.
My nephrologist is treating me for high hypercalciuria.
He suspects sarcoidosis because of very high vitamin D (1,25-D) level.
I also have enlarged lymph nodes in both armpits.
My chest x-ray is negative and my pulmonary function tests are normal.
I just had emergency exploratory surgery for an intestinal blockage, but no known cause was identified.
Is sarcoidosis something I should continue to pursue?Yes.
Consider getting a lymph node biopsy.
I'm a 47-year-old black woman who was diagnosed with sarcoidosis in 2010 after my PET scan lit up like a Christmas tree.
A cardiac surgeon also did a biopsy of one of my lymph node, but it had not affected my lungs or heart.
Should I have follow-up testing to see if it has spread to other organs?This is a common situation.
Generally I agree with the strategy of your doctors that PET positive result alone is not a indication to treat.
I usually tell patients, ‘If it's not causing a problem, it's probably not going to cause a problem.’
In other words, I would need to see some symptoms or a threat to the function of an organ to be interested in treating.
Routine monitoring without fancy testing is usually sufficient for those purposes.
When sarcoidosis affects the salivary glands, why do biopsies sometimes not always show sarcoidosis, but just chronic inflammation?Sarcoidosis can be a ‘skip lesion’ meaning that the area biopsied might not actually be the exact area involved.
That is one of the challenges in sarcoidosis.
I have had sarcoidosis of the lung for about 10 years.
It is considered to be active, but I am not on any treatment.
I am not having any symptoms other than shortness of breath upon exertion.
I am yes somewhat out of shape at five foot and five inches tall and weighing 110.8 lbs.
I believe I need to tone up, and I am starting to swim.
My platelets are always high.
Upon last checkup two weeks ago, my platelets were 803,000 with a normal bone marrow biopsy.
Have you seen this before?
Having been a smoker, how can you distinguish lymphadenopathy in the lung as sarcoidosis vs lung cancer?Sometimes sarcoidosis causes low platelets, but unless your spleen was removed, I cannot fathom how it would cause high platelets.
Usually lung cancer and sarcoidosis can be suspected as different entities based on the CT scan appearance.
If there is a really a difficulty, other than a biopsy, sometimes we try a short course of steroids under the idea that cancer would not shrink with steroids unless it is lymphoma.
What are the similarities and differences between sarcoidosis and lymphoma?
Please explain the standard and novel new approaches for treating sarcoidosis.
How common is it for lymphoma (diffused large B-cell) to develop from sarcoidosis, which is what happened to my mother?Differentiating between sarcoidosis and lymphoma can be very challenging as presentations can be very similar.
It is extremely important as sarcoidosis treatment can make lymphoma worse.
Does breast cancer sometimes get misdiagnosed when it is sarcoidosis?Breast sarcoidosis can be a real problem when getting mammograms, MRIs and PET scans.
The only way to know for sure is to have a biopsy and to look at tissue under the microscope.
To make matters more complicated, cancer can cause a sarcoidosis-like reaction.
I have failed long-term, high-dose prednisone, methotrexate, Remicade®  (infliximab), and Arava® (leflunomide).
I am currently on Imuran®  (azathioprine)100 mg and I have been getting 40 grams of 10 percent intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) every three weeks for four years now.
I am five feet tall and weigh 114 lbs.
I lost 140 lbs from sarcoidosis.
It helps some, but I am starting to have a lot of continuous pain, insomnia and fatigue.
What options do you feel I still have left to try?
What do you think about stem cell transplant for treating sarcoidosis?If your main issues are fatigue, pain and insomnia, this may not actually represent active sarcoidosis, but more a consequence of a history of sarcoidosis.
Many patients with sarcoidosis can have sleep disorders and fibromyalgia at the same time.
I would seek a consultation by a sleep specialist and also a consultation with a pain specialist to come up with a better pain regimen.
Believe it or not, getting on an exercise regimen might also be helpful.
Stem cell transplantation is still very experimental and with significant risks.
I suspect it would not be of benefit.
Sarcoidosis has become a ‘round robin’ for me.
The pain and stress from sarcoidosis affect my blood sugar and diabetes.
My one remaining kidney is at chronic kidney disease stage 3, and my liver is affected, too.
This makes my blood pressure rise, and makes the pain and stress rise.
This then makes the sarcoidosis worse.
This goes round and round.
All of the stress is causing more symptoms in my body and various conditions.
My 14-year battle with sarcoidosis since its diagnosis has been met along the way with doctors saying, ‘I don't know.’
I am already being treated for stress and depression.
I have had renal failure and a heart attack, lost one kidney, contracted two strains of MRSA (methicillin-resistant Streptococcus aureus) and then necrotizing fasciitis in the sarcoidosis skin lesions.
My battle with sarcoidosis is complicated.  As I asked, where do I attempt to stop the merry-go-round?
Each thing that happens causes damage and a flare of inflammation, as well as a rise in blood pressure, complications and pain.
The pain is everyday, often at level eight and above for hours with no relief with peripheral neuropathy in my legs, bad knee joints and skin sarcoidosis.
Do I start with trying to ease the pain?
Do I start with trying to bring the inflammation down?
Right now I'm attempting to ease symptoms through diet.
I would have the nodules in your breast tissue evaluated.
They may be a consequence of sarcoidosis, and if not bothering you would not require specific therapy.
However, breast cancer also can cause breast nodules and should be excluded.
Lymph nodes related to sarcoidosis also do not require specific therapy unless bothersome.
You may want to confirm that these lymph nodes are related to sarcoidosis and not something else.
I was diagnosed with cancer in 2009 at the age of 33 years old.
I then was diagnosed with sarcoidosis, which initially was thought to be more cancer until it was biopsied in my lungs.
I am in remission from the cancer, but don't know which health issues I have are side effects from all the treatments and what are results of the sarcoidosis.
I am sick and in pain all of the time.
I also have an awful skin condition that no dermatologist has been able to help me with, and I am just miserable.
I cannot function half of the days of the month and need some help.
I have no medical insurance which further complicates the situation.
How can I get some help?
It is difficult to know the cause of your symptoms.
I have sarcoidosis and seronegative rheumatoid arthritis.
Is there a way to determine which one is causing the flare?It can be difficult.
Sometimes there are radiographic findings that would suggest one disease over the other.
Nevertheless, the approach to therapy is very similar for each disease.
Generally, they run in different directions, since more than 90 percent of lung cancer is related to smoking, whereas smoking seems to be somewhat protective from the development of sarcoidosis.
How can I determine the stage of my sarcoidosis?
What factors determine my chances of needing a lung transplant?Sarcoidosis stage is defined by chest x-ray.
However, the severity of sarcoidosis can be determined by organ involvement.
In terms of lung transplantation, this is determined by a ‘lung score’ that depends on your lung function, exercise tolerance and oxygen requirement.
There are many requirements to qualify for lung transplantation that depend on your weight and other medical problems.
I have sarcoidosis in my lungs and lymph nodes that was diagnosed two years ago.
Last week I had a CAT scan and it showed spots on my spleen.
I also just had an EGD (esophagoscopy gastroscopy duodenoscopy) and it showed inflammation in my stomach—which the gastrointestinal doctor said could be sarcoma.
They are both causing me pain.
It sounds to me like the sarcoidosis is spreading, but I'm not a doctor.
And, would they need to take a more aggressive approach in helping it not to spread or keeping down the inflammation?
In February 2010, I had a cervical fusion of my C 4,5 and 6 vertebrae to alleviate pressure on my spine, and resolve numbness in my hands, arms, legs and feet.
The numbness was resolved, however, roughly one and one half year later.  I developed a sarcoid lesion in my spinal cord at the C5 level.
Is it remotely possible that the cadaver bone used in my fusion was somehow the cause of my sarcoidosis?
Can bone carry sarcoidosis and transfer it to the healthy recipient?We don't believe this has been described previously from bone.
However, sarcoidosis has been documented to be transmitted after other types of transplantation, including lung, heart and bone marrow.
My mother had sarcoidosis when she was in her late 30s.
Is this disease hereditary?
What should I be looking out for?
Are there steps that you can take to reduce your chances of getting it?
Does sarcoidosis increase your chances for other disease such as cancer?Sarcoidosis can run in families.
The pulmonary manifestations of sarcoidosis are the most common, but sarcoidosis can affect any organ system of the body.
Therefore, if you develop a new symptom, I would let your provider know about your family history so that he or she can keep sarcoidosis in his or her differential diagnosis.
There is nothing that can specifically be done to prevent sarcoidosis.
