There has been some recent interest in sarcoidosis and cancers coexisting in the same patient, but it is not a specific risk factor for cancer.
Can you use Plaquenil®  (hydroxychloroquine) with a family history of macular degeneration?Yes.
Just get routine eye examinations every six to 12 months.
I have lupus pernio that is active.
My  methotrexate has been increased to 15 mg and Plaquenil®  (hydroxychloroquine) was started at 200 mg twice per day.
Some literature recommends eye tests, but that has not been suggested here.
Sarcoidosis can affect the eye and thus we typically recommend yearly eye examinations for that reason as well.
Is there any new treatment beside Plaquenil®  (hydroxychloroquine) and gabapentin?There are many therapies available for sarcoidosis.
We choose which therapy depending upon the specific sarcoidosis issue.
What is your opinion of transitioning from prednisone to methotrexate?
Also, for neurologic pain, Cymbalta® seems to help, but insurance only covers one per day—even though my doctor has prescribed this medication two times per day.
Can you recommend any alternative for the nerve pain?We typically recommend that patients with sarcoidosis get an EKG to look for any conduction delays that might be an indicator of cardiac sarcoidosis.
We also recommend a yearly eye examination and yearly labs to screen for involvement in the bone marrow, kidney and liver, and also to test calcium.
If there is pulmonary involvement, at least yearly pulmonary function tests should also be performed.
I have multi-organ chronic sarcoidosis.
My body is constantly swollen and filled with inflammation.
My throat swells to the point that it appears as if I don't have a neck and my vocal cords are affected too.
I can feel the inflammation in my neck along my jaw, I look like a hamster holding food in its pockets.
Do you have any advice on how to get rid of the inflammation?It sounds like you need to be on immunosuppressive therapy.
Steroids are often our first-line treatment, but there are a number of other therapies commonly used in sarcoidosis.
You may want to find a sarcoidosis expert in your area.
I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis four years ago, first of the skin and then one year later in the joints.
Two years later it affected the lungs and other sites.
About two years ago I was treated with drip chemotherapy with Cytoxan®  (cyclophosphamide).
The sarcoidosis is active again, but my insurance company will not allow this treatment.
What is the best treatment for sarcoidosis?Recommendations on therapy depend somewhat on organ involvement.
Our ‘best’ or more aggressive therapy is Remicade® (infliximab), but there are others.
Sometimes financial help can be provided by pharmaceutical companies.
I am a 72-year-old white male with sarcoidosis and inflammatory arthritis for the past four years.
I now have moderate pulmonary fibrosis and I am on and off supplemental oxygen, becoming more out of breath and experiencing a consistent cough.
I have been on methotrexate and prednisone, and it is no longer effective.
My insurance company has turned me down for intravenous infusions of Remicade®  (infliximab), for which I have filed an appeal.
However, I also do not have a spleen due to war injuries many years ago, so I am also concerned about lowering my immune system even further— even if I am approved for Remicade® .
It may be important to consider with your doctor whether you have active versus burned-out disease.
You may also consider looking for whether there is pulmonary hypertension (high blood pressures in the lung) associated with sarcoidosis that is causing your shortness of breath.
I have been diagnosed with sarcoidosis confirmed by a video-assisted thoracic (VATS) procedure.
My problem is finding someone to manage my condition.
I have not been able to find a physician in my area to deal with it in the bones.
My problems include pain, aches, fatigue and now depression from feeling so horrible.
The methotrexate and prednisone regime seemed to cause so many other problems.
In fact, now I am acquiring myopathy brought on by the steroids.
I can barely walk the stairs.
Up until this time I was a perfect bill of health for a 54 year old.
I did not take any medicine for anything and my BMI was good.
My husband just started treatment for sarcoidosis, which it was diagnosed by process of elimination.
Three weeks into high doses of prednisone, he has blurry vision in both eyes— yet they say not to stop or replace the steroid.
Do you have any advice?Steroids can cause many side effects for the eyes, most commonly glaucoma (high pressures in the eye) and cataracts.
Cataracts generally take awhile to develop, usually longer than a few weeks.
However, it sounds like you should at least have the pressures in your eye checked.
And of course, there are options besides steroids.
If you are being told there are no other options, you may consider getting a second opinion.
My son is receiving methotrexate and 10 mg prednisone for treatment of sarcoidosis for one year.
What should he do to lessen the terrible side effects including, swelling, stretch marks and acne?
The side-effects that you are describing are most likely related to prednisone.
You may discuss with his physician to titrate up (increase) his methotrexate (if possible) vs. a consideration to change from an oral to a subcutaneous route of administration to improve bioavailability and thus effectiveness of the methotrexate.
There may also be the possibility of adding another agent so that the prednisone can be weaned down or tapered off.
If steroids are presenting a problem for the patient to handle, what other drug alternatives are there for treating sarcoidosis?This is a topic that is near and dear to me.
I believe we probably overuse steroids, but there are several alternatives.
Each has advantages and disadvantages, differing expenses and risks, and differing times to work well.
I was diagnosed with sarcoidosis in April 2012.
My lungs and my kidneys were affected.
I was put on a strict diet for my kidneys, and prescribed deflazacort steroids 45 mg at that time.
In August it was reduced to 30 mg, and in November it was reduced to 15 mg.
I have returned to feeling normal, but I began to develop small red spots on my arms and legs.
The redness has increased to large rashes or blotches that appear anywhere on my body, but not my face.
Is this a reaction to the long term use of steroids?
Friends and relatives are concerned about me being on steroids for over a year.
Should I be concerned?Steroids are not without side effects.
They can cause eye problems (such as cataracts and glaucoma), are a risk factor for diabetes and obesity, and can also cause thinning of the bones (osteoporosis).
In general, patients should be on the lowest feasible dose of steroids possible and, at times, other immunosuppressive therapy may need to be added to allow for reduction in steroids.
Please keep in mind that steroids cannot be stopped abruptly if you have taken them chronically as they also place you at risk for adrenal insufficiency and an unsafe drop in blood pressure.
Steroids can cause changes in the skin as well, but if might be safe to see a dermatologist to make sure this is not anything else (like skin sarcoidosis).
I have had sarcoidosis for 30 years—29 years I have been treated with prednisone.
I am currently on a maintenance dose of 10 mg per day.
As a result of my prolonged use of prednisone, I am also a diabetic, have high blood pressure and high cholesterol, which are all pretty much under control.
What could cause me to have low magnesium and a rapid heart beat if my control is good?
My vitamin D level is fine.
There are many causes of a rapid heart beat.
You should have your provider do an EKG to better determine your heart rhythm to determine whether further work-up is indicated.
Magnesium can be low due to a loss in the GI (gastrointestinal) or renal (kidney) tract.
This is probably unrelated to your sarcoidosis and could be rectified with a supplement.
I currently have mostly neurologic involvement with sarcoidosis and I am on Remicade®  (infliximab) and CellCept®  (mycophenolate mofetil)for management.
I have had four infusions (600 mg) to date of Remicade®   and see little— if any—improvement. I am worried about the potential side effects.
How long should I give the infusions to work before deciding they are not worth the risk and just get off the Remicade® ?Typically, we would see some improvement within about six doses of Remicade® , at a dose of 5 mg/kg.
Sometimes radiographic (MRI) improvement precedes clinical improvement.
We often treat patients with long-term Remicade®  if necessary, if there is a response.
How long should I stay on methotrexate?You can stay on methotrexate indefinitely.
Your laboratory values for blood count and liver function tests should be monitored at regular intervals.
When my husband was 62 years old in 2005, he was diagnosed cardiac sarcoidosis presenting with ventricular tachycardia.
An ICD (implantable cardioverter defibrillator) was implanted.
Ischemic heart disease was excluded.
The subsequent development and biopsy of hilar lymph nodes confirmed sarcoidosis.
He was treated with steroids and methotrexate.
There is a scar remnant in the heart and no evidence of active disease.
He had one episode of ventricular tachycardia in 2008, and his ICD delivered a shock.
He remains asymptomatic and recent EF (ejection fraction) is 49 percent.
His other medical problems are hypertension, diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism, but all are under good control.
I think the safest approach would be for him to see consultation with a gastroenterologist for consideration of liver biopsy since he has been on more than 3 g of methotrexate.
I would not expect ‘fatty liver’ to be the appearance of methotrexate liver disease, but this may be related to his diabetes.
If there is methotrexate-related liver injury, there are other options for immunosuppression.
With his history of cardiac sarcoidosis, I agree that he likely may need lifelong therapy of some sort to keep him in remission.
I have stage 3 lung sarcoidosis.
I am completing a six-month prednisone program, and I am now down to 7.5 milligrams.
My lungs are clearer.
I will need to make decision for on-going treatment.
I am a 57-year-old, otherwise healthy, woman.
I am interested to know other patients’ comments regarding the use of methotrexate vs low doses of prednisone.
Or should I do nothing and hope to remain in remission?Whatis the best means of dealing with the fatigue associated with sarcoidosis?
What is the impact of stress on sarcoidosis patients?
In general, I think it is useful to try to taper the steroids at some point in time to see if there is still a need for therapy.
The alternative is to throw your hands up in the air and say, ‘I’m going to take medications forever.’
The success of tapering depends on the duration of the sarcoidosis and some other factors.
However, a large percentage of patients—even with fairly chronic disease—can successfully come off steroids if they try it.
I would make your sarcoidosis prove it needs ongoing therapy.
Then, I might try again in the future.
In terms of fatigue, it is very common.
I like to recommend exercise with walking 30 minutes per day as a first approach, and consider whether there is sleep apnea or depression as well.
Exercise is hard—and you may not want to do it and it can be painful, but it pays dividends as much as any medication, in my opinion, in the long run.
Stress probably makes sarcoidosis worse.
Find ways to reduce it if you can.
Simplify your life if possible.
My neurologist states that as long as there are no lesions in brain or spinal cord you should wean treatment of prednisone and methotrexate.
You don't continue just because significant symptoms remain.
Some of your difficulty may be due to prior damage.
If the lesions are now gone, it might be worth weaning therapy, but you will need to be followed very carefully for worsening of symptoms.
I take prednisone for sarcoidosis which I believe causes my vitamin D level to be extremely low.
I would take a Vitamin D supplement, but I have had a history of kidney stones, which I think would be aggravated by the vitamin D supplement.
Any suggestions?Many patients with sarcoidosis have a low vitamin D level (25-hydroxy vitamin D).
However, if the active form is checked (1,25) it is often elevated or normal.
I would have your provider check this before beginning a vitamin D supplement.
I also would be hesitant given your history of stones.
A 24-hour urine calcium would also be a helpful value to have before making a decision regarding vitamin D supplementation.
I have sarcoidosis and my vitamin D level bottomed out.
I take 5,000 IU daily per doctor’s orders after taking a prescription of vitamin D to bring it up.
I have read that vitamin D reacts differently with sarcoidosis.
I had an emergency department doctor tell me that I was vitamin D toxic at one time.
Where do I go from here?Please ask your doctor to check a 1,25 vitamin D level.
Patients with sarcoidosis often have a low 25-dihydroxyvitamin D level, which is the measurement that is most commonly checked, but a normal or high vitamin D (1,25-D), which is the active form.
If your 1,25 vitamin D level is normal, I would not take a supplement.
The granuloma, which is the pathologic lesion in sarcoidosis, is responsible for converting vitamin D to the active vitamin D (1,25-D) form.
Thus, patients with sarcoidosis are at risk of vitamin D toxicity, renal stones, etc..
Some actually believe that vitamin D can cause sarcoidosis flares.
I found out I had sarcoidosis when I was 44 years old and I am 56 years old now.
At the time the disease was active.
I was not able to tolerate prednisone.
I only took it for one month, then it went untreated.
The last few times I had it check, it was inactive and scar tissue has settled in.
I don't notice much activity with the exception of sinus, allergies and hay fever.
It  is something I fight with daily and I have problems sleeping every night.
Since I don't tolerate strong prescription medications, I would be interested in something all natural to treat this disease.
Please advise if there is anything safe I could take for it when and if it flares back up again.
I am not aware of any homeopathic agents to treat sarcoidosis.
Regarding your sinuses, try doing sinus rinses (neti pot or squirt bottle) with saline.
Consider adding two drops of baby shampoo to the mixture.
That might help with sinus congesting and crusting.
A nasal steroid spray can also be helpful.
What is your opinion on adding naturalist treatments that reduce inflammation, namely turmeric (tea or pills), such as in Kapparest™.
Also, what about proteolytic enzymes to reduce fibrosis?There is no data for these agents and sarcoidosis.
There is some data on turmeric as an anti-fibrotic, but this is mainly animal data.
The problem with supplements is that they are not regulated by the government.
There may also be significant drug-to-drug interactions, so if you decide to take these, I would discuss it further with your pharmacist or provider.
Will diet or nutrition have an impact on chronic sarcoidosis?It is unknown at this time.
Can an anti-inflammatory diet help prevent or mediate the spread of sarcoidosis?It is unknown.
Are there specific vitamins and mineral supplements recommended for chronic sarcoidosis?No.
However, flares have been associated with vitamin D supplementation so vitamin D should be avoided in sarcoidosis patients with high calcium and renal stones.
I have been diagnosed with a stage 1 sarcoidosis.
Only my lungs have granulomas.
Can I practice scuba diving in shallow water?
Can aerobic exercise lessen the effect of lung scarring?
No, but it can improve your exercise tolerance and overall general health and, thus, your quality of life.
Mypractitioner told me that my lung granulomas never disappear.
However, I see the opposite on your website.
What is the exact situation?
Is there a chance mine will disappear?
I was diagnosed with stage sarcoidosis last week.
Yes, there is a chance that sarcoidosis can remit spontaneously.
Is there any cure for sarcoidosis?No.
However, in a number of patients, sarcoidosis can disappear as mysteriously as it appears.
Is it typical that sarcoidosis goes into remission, but can reappear at any time?
Are there specific triggers to the reappearance?I am just starting treatment for sarcoidosis and have started on 40 mg of prednisone and 100 mg of dapsone per day.
I was first on Bactrim®  (sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim), and they switched to the dapsone as I started to experience blurred vision in the right eye.
I am getting a referral to an ophthalmologist.
Is this unusual?Many people with sarcoidosis do go in to remission.
If remission has lasted for at least three years, recurrence is very rare.
Your eye symptoms could possibly be related to sarcoidosis versus medication toxicity to prednisone or dapsone.
I agree with the need to have an ophthalmologic evaluation.
Everyone with sarcoidosis should see an eye doctor on a yearly basis.
I was diagnosed in 2010 with lung, spleen and heart sarcoidosis.
After receiving an ICD (implantable cardioverter-defibrillator) and a number of shocks, I have had two ablation surgeries.
Originally I was told that I am probably not a candidate for remission because of the depth of the sarcoid evolvement—although remission is always a guess.
What steps can I take to apply for disability insurance having sarcoidosis?Disability is usually determined by organ impairment.
There is a formal disability process that is required.
I am searching for one specific doctor to go to handle all of my sarcoidosis needs.
What are some of the new treatments that are being used to treat advanced sarcoidosis?
What have been the results or findings for treatment?
We would be more than happy to evaluate you.
There are many different medications that we use and data on efficacy is somewhat dependent on organ involvement.
Our team of specialists, who have expertise and an interest in sarcoidosis, includes pulmonologists, cardiologists, electrophysiologists, neurologists , ophthalmologists, dermatologists and rheumatologists.
Let us know if you want us to let you know about future web chat events!Some participants have asked about upcoming web chat topics.
Patients who have an incompetent cervix with a stitch placed may also be put on bed rest.
Bed rest has become more controversial recently.
Also, potential complications from bed rest include an increase in blood clots in the lower extremities.
A friend of mine recently had something called PUPPP rash.
What is it and can I prevent it in my pregnancy?
Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP), also known as polymorphic eruption of pregnancy.
This is a benign condition to both mother and baby.
However, it can be extremely annoying.
This condition is usually treated with topical ointments and baths and usually resolves with delivery.
There is no way to prevent this—it is random.
What is preterm labor?
What does it feel like?
Preterm labor is labor that begins prior to 37 weeks of pregnancy.
For most patients it feels the same as labor feels when the baby is at term, but labor varies from patient to patient.
At what point is it safe to start forms of induction, i.e. stripping membranes or stretching the cervix to get labor moving?
Usually, these techniques can be applied at 38 to 40 weeks.
It’s my first pregnancy, and I’m not sure what to expect.
What are the benefits of a water birth versus a bed birth?
How long do you have to be actually pregnant before the pregnancy is induced?
Water births have recently become popular—but there are benefits and risks.
This is something to discuss with your OB/GYN (obstetrician-gynecologist).
Typically, obstetricians do not allow a pregnancy to go beyond 42 weeks, but there may be small increased risks with going on 41 weeks of pregnancy that should be discussed with your physician.
Are forceps or vacuum methods commonly used during delivery?
I hear a lot of scary things about forceps.
It depends on the hospital where you deliver.
Forceps and vacuum deliveries are safe when used by experienced obstetricians.
I mostly use a vacuum, but some physicians feel more comfortable with forceps.
What happens to cause a baby to be breech (feet first presentation)?
Can a breech baby be safely delivered vaginally?
No one knows for sure what causes a baby to be breech.
However, one theory is that many breech babies have a head that is likely too large for the woman's pelvis, and nature is attempting to put something smaller in position for delivery.
I am scheduled for a vaginal delivery, but what are the circumstances that could occur that would change it to a C-section (Cesarean)?
There are numerous conditions that may warrant a change prior to labor—too many different things to go into here.
The most common is a breech or transverse presentation of the baby.
However, most primary, or first, C-sections are performed during labor.
The most common reasons are failure to progress, which can be failure to get to full cervical dilatation, an inability to push the baby out and fetal distress prior to the end of labor (when the mom is not fully dilated).
With my first baby 14 months ago, I was brought in for induction with complications, including eclampsia and/or HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count) syndrome, three days before my due date.
It was caught with blood work the day before delivery.
Prior to induction, my doctor realized the baby flipped to breech overnight, so I had a C-section as to not further injure my liver.
I am now two weeks from my due date with my second baby.
Any insight about whether these ‘flukes’ could happen again?
Also, am I a good candidate for vaginal birth after cesarian (VBAC)?
So far, there are no signs of complications and the baby’s head is facing down.
How safe are VBACs?
When I mention to people that I am planning to have one, they become very concerned and ask if it's safe.
What are the success rates?
You likely had preeclampsia with HELLP syndrome.
Eclampsia is preeclampsia with a seizure.
I'm assuming you would have remembered if you had a seizure!
Preeclampsia is a condition that includes elevated blood pressure, increased urine protein and edema (body swelling).
HELLP syndrome is a complication of preeclampsia that includes hemolysis (breakdown of red blood cells), elevated liver enzymes and low platelets.
You likely had a cesarean for the breech as there is a high rate of complications associated with a vaginal breech delivery.
This is the best scenario for attempting a VBAC.
Our overall success with VBAC is about 60 percent, but with a previous c-section for a breech baby the rate is much higher.
The only caveat is that you need to make sure that your c-section was performed as a low-transverse incision It doesn't matter what the skin incision looks like—only the uterine incision counts.
Any other type of incision increases the risk of a uterine rupture in labor to an unsafe level.
A low transverse incision has a risk of 1 percent of uterine rupture during labor after c-section.
You should discuss this with your obstetrician prior to making an attempt at vaginal delivery.
A friend recently had a rough delivery--she wound up with a uterine infection and the full-term baby was in the NICU for a few days on antibiotics.
What is a uterine infection, what are the risk factors, and how common are they?
How does a uterine infection affect the mom and baby?
Most likely your friend experienced a prolonged labor which increased her risk for a infection.
Uterine infection is typically an infection of the lining of the uterus that may also lead to an infection in the newborn.
The most important thing you can do is stay within your normal weight for your height.
Is there any advice you would recommend for eating prior to getting pregnant?
If you are not yet pregnant, try to eat the amount of calories that would keep you within a normal healthy weight.
Food choices that include fruits and vegetables, low-fat foods, baked or grilled fish, meat and low-fat dairy products will provide the correct amount of nutrition your body needs.
When should you start to gain weight during pregnancy?
Weight gain will occur gradually once you become pregnant.
The extra weight goes to the baby, the placenta, your breast tissue, your extra blood supply and your uterus, where the baby is growing.
You should gain about two to four pounds in the first trimester, then approximately one pound per week in the second and third trimester.
Depending on the weight you start with, your doctor will give you the range of weight you should gain, which can be between 11 and 35 lbs.
What is the right amount of weight to gain during each stage of my pregnancy?
Weight gain should be slow and gradual.
If you were normal weight prior to pregnancy, then you should expect to gain 25 to 35 lbs.
For overweight women, a range of 11 to 25 lbs. is ideal.
However, it is very important to be under the supervision of an expert provider.
What is the average amount of weight a woman can expect to gain during pregnancy?
Also, should women partake in light-to-moderate exercise to help with weight gain?
Your weight gain depends on how much you already weigh.
According to the National Institutes of Health guidelines, if your body mass index (a measurement of your height and weight) is between 19 and 24.9, then your weight gain should be between 25 and 35 lbs.
If it is between 25 and 29.9, then your weight gain should be between 15 and 25 lbs.
If it is 30 or greater, then your weight gain should be between 11 and 20lbs.
Your obstetrician-gynecologist physician will direct you to the range best suited for your current weight, based on those guidelines.
How many extra calories should I really be eating, since I am ‘eating for two’?
During pregnancy, the ‘myth’ is that you’re eating for two, when in fact your baby only needs approximately 300 extra calories per day to help meet his or her nutritional and caloric needs.
I would emphasize healthy choices to include adequate amounts of protein, carbohydrates and fat.
For example, yogurt with some nuts or a lean meat would be a great option.
I am overweight and have heard rumors about the effects it can have on my baby.
If so, can you explain some of the risks?
Yes, it is true that being overweight or obese can be harmful to you and your baby.
Your risk for developing diabetes during pregnancy is increased, which can cause your baby to become very large during development.
The baby can become very difficult to deliver.
Other complications which can affect your baby include being born too early (preterm), having a shoulder stuck during delivery, having birth defects and gaining too much weight.
I am newly pregnant and pretty heavy already.
My BMI is almost 38 (I am five foot seven inches tall and 242 lbs.)
Are there any health issues when obese and pregnant?
With your body mass index, your weight gain should be between 11 and 20 lbs.
Excess weight can have health effects on your baby and you.
Your baby may be delivered too early.
Your baby is at risk for growing too large if you develop diabetes, which can happen in pregnancy with excess weight.
Your baby may become too large to deliver easily, making a cesarean section necessary.
A limb of your baby (usually a shoulder) can get stuck during vaginal delivery because he or she is too large.
Other effects on the baby include a risk for developing diabetes and being obese during childhood.
You can minimize these effects now by exercising regularly (discuss this with your physician first) and keeping your weight gain within the guidelines given above (11 to 20 lbs).
I was overweight when I got pregnant.
Because of the baby’s position, I am never hungry and can only eat a little bit at a time.
I have been losing weight.
My doctor says the baby is growing fine.
Is it O.K. to lose weight during pregnancy?
I understand your concern with weight loss during pregnancy—it is not typically encouraged!
However, your obstetrician-gynecologist is monitoring your baby's growth and your health status carefully.
Since all is well at this time, then I would encourage you not to worry.
Continue to choose healthy foods although your portion sizes are small, and continue to follow up with your doctor regularly.
I have had gastric bypass in the past for morbid obesity.
I have lost about 100 pounds.
Will I have problems getting pregnant?
And if I do, how will nutrition affect my baby when I can only eat small amounts?
Congratulations on your weight loss of 100 lbs. with gastric bypass surgery!
Most women of reproductive age tend to be more fertile after surgery due to the hormonal shifts from the weight loss.
So, unless there is other medical history that could prevent you from becoming pregnant, you should not have a problem.
Is it possible to follow a vegetarian diet during pregnancy?
Yes, it is possible, but you will need to take a B12 supplement, since that important vitamin is found primarily in meats.
Are there foods you should avoid eating during pregnancy and others that you would recommend to provide additional nutrients?
Your diet should include nutrient-dense foods, such as lean meats, low-fat dairy, fruits, vegetables and whole grains.
It is important to have adequate amounts of calcium, folic acid, iron, vitamin A and protein in your diet.
Foods that are harmful during pregnancy include raw and seared fish, fish containing high levels of mercury, and soft cheeses that are not made with pasteurized milk.
How much water should I be drinking during pregnancy?
Is sparkling water acceptable?
You should be drinking approximately 9 cups of water per day (8 oz each).
You can also get some of your water from other beverages that you drink daily.
Remember to limit your caffeine intake.
If you drink coffee, just one cup daily will be enough.
Sparkling water is O.K., but read the label to be sure there is no added sodium.
Is it safe to work out while pregnant?
How hard should I push my body to still be physically active, but not cause any harm to my baby?
Physical activity during pregnancy is an excellent thing to do!
It can help with flexibility and relieving lower back pain that can be caused by the extra weight in the midsection from the baby.
However, it is very important to listen to your body and not push yourself too hard.
You do not want to run a marathon or join a boot camp, for example.
Something like walking or swimming is a great activity because they are low-impact exercises.
I take medication for hypertension (that is weight-related) that is considered class C and not recommended during pregnancy.
Are there hypertension medications that are safe during pregnancy and while breast feeding?
It is important to have this discussion with your obstetrics-gynecologist physician.
There are medications that treat elevated blood pressure during pregnancy more safely than others, and your doctor will be able to determine which one is best for you at this time.
Do you have any tips for losing the weight after having my baby?
Aside from the great nutritional effect that breast-feeding has on your baby, it promotes faster weight loss after birth.
Breastfeeding burns about 500 extra calories per day to build and maintain a milk supply.
If you choose not to breastfeed or need to lose more weight than breastfeeding will allow, then your diet and exercise should be evaluated by expert providers to help you achieve your goal weight.
Depending on the medical evaluation, options can include a very low calorie diet, use of weight loss medications, meal replacements and intense exercise.
I am unable to breastfeed and know that would help my weight loss efforts after pregnancy.
If you are unable to breastfeed because your baby will not latch on or because it is very painful for you, then I would recommend that you pump your breast milk and feed it to your baby.
This will help with the additional 500 calories you burn during breastfeeding and, very importantly, transfer your protective antibodies to your baby.
After giving birth, and while breastfeeding, can you still diet?
Will the baby get adequate nutrition?
Breastfeeding will help with some weight loss, so I would not recommend that you go on a diet.
I would advise that you choose healthy, low-fat and low-calorie foods.
Keep your portion sizes small and avoid second helpings.
That, combined with at least 30 to 60 minutes of exercise at an intensity suitable for your fitness level on most days of the week should be adequate until you wean your baby off of breastfeeding.
Once that period is over, you can consider going on a diet to lose more weight if needed.
Is there any correlation between weight gain during pregnancy and postpartum depression?
Some people experience postpartum depression for a number of reasons, mainly due to the large hormonal imbalance which occurs.
If it is difficult to lose the excess weight after pregnancy, it is possible that some depression can occur.
Rheumatoid arthritis and lupus affect some joints more than the others.
It is usually your rheumatologist who will be best able to tell you how to manage this better.
How can I tell if I have rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis (OA) in my wrists?
Also, if I chose to have carpal bone fusion to relieve the wrist pain, will that prevent the further development of arthritis?
Thirdly, how can I tell if my wrist pain is due to arthritis or carpal tunnel syndrome?
The location for wrist OA is specific and your doctor will be able to tell.
The fusion of one joint will not prevent arthritis in other joints.
The location is different for pain from arthritis vs. carpal tunnel.
There are tests which show that you have carpal tunnel clinically.
Your rheumatologist or orthopedic doctor will be the best judge of this.
My husband is a carpenter.
He can get through the day, but nights are horrible.
Any little bump to his hands causes great pain, and he is up often walking the floor.
He takes medication, and recently was fitted for a brace that actually exacerbated the pain at night.
What more can be done?
The area involved is the index and middle finger knuckles of both hands.
He could have rheumatoid arthritis.
He will need an evaluation by a rheumatologist who will perform an examination and detailed blood work before considering further treatment decision.
The medications to treat rheumatoid arthritis are strong.
Hence, we need a thorough work-up before starting treatment I am a 58-year-old female, and have been challenged with arthritis for many years now (in my large joints as well as my hands and feet).
My hands and fingers are starting to get deformed and even more painful.
Can anything be done for that condition?
You need an evaluation for rheumatoid arthritis, especially if there is deformity now.
If the evaluation is negative, it could be due to osteoarthritis as well.
There are lots of treatments available to treat both, but first a decision needs to be made whether the disease is due to degeneration or inflammation—as the treatment is different for both What is seronegative rheumatoid arthritis (RA)?
Is it treated the same as other arthritis?
Seronegative RA is rheumatoid arthritis where the blood test, rheumatoid factor and the CCP (cyclic citrullinated peptide) antibody are negative.
Around 20 percent of patients with RA will be seronegative or blood test negative.
The treatments are typically similar.
I am 75-years-old, and my hands are my problem.
Like my father, I am losing the ability to make a fist.
I am having trouble gripping things like a golf club.
Can anything be done to arrest or reverse this?
