Multi-Drug Resistant TB (or MDR TB) is a form of TB caused by bacteria (germs) that are resistant to the usual drugs used to treat "ordinary" TB.
In other words, the normal drugs that we use to treat "ordinary" TB will not work.
What causes MDR TB?
MDR TB is caused by the development of TB bacteria, which have become resistant to ordinary TB drugs.
This occurs as a result of inadequate or irregular management of "ordinary" TB, either by using inappropriate drug combinations or by using single drugs for "ordinary" TB, clinics running out of drug stocks, inadequate counseling of patients leading to patients not taking their treatment correctly (poor treatment compliance) or patients not returning for treatment (defaulting treatment).
Can someone develop MDR TB without ever having been infected with "ordinary TB"?
Most MDR TB will develop as a result of poor adherence to the treatment for "ordinary" TB. However it is possible for someone who has never had or been treated for TB before to be infected with bacteria that are already resistant to ordinary TB drugs, if they have had close contact with someone with MDR TB.
Who is at risk of contracting MDR TB?
Anybody who is exposed to someone with MDR TB may be at risk of developing it.
Most people who have strong immune systems will not develop the disease, as their body’s immune system can fight the infection.
People who are at greater risk of developing "ordinary" TB are also at greater risk for MDR TB. 
These include the following persons:
Babies and children under 5 years of age.
They will need to have treatment to prevent TB disease if exposed to someone with TB.
HIV infected persons
Malnourished persons
Persons living in overcrowded households/ public institutions like prisons.
Persons whose immune systems are not strong due to other diseases e.g. Diabetes Mellitus, cancer and some medications.
Persons with substance abuse problems e.g. alcoholism or drug abuse.
Is it easier to get MDR TB?
Is MDR TB more infectious than "ordinary" TB?
There is no evidence to suggest that it is easier to get MDR TB than ordinary TB.
TB of the lungs is relatively more infectious than TB affecting other organs/ systems of the body, as the bacteria may be excreted and spread by air-borne droplets.
What are the symptoms (complaints) of persons with MDR TB?
The symptoms are the same as for "ordinary" TB
A persistent cough for longer than 2 weeks.
The cough may be productive and blood stained, chest pain, loss of weight and loss of appetite and night sweats.
How is MDR TB diagnosed?
Once a person presents with symptoms of TB, or is found to be a close contact of somebody with TB, clinic staff will request the person to provide two sputum (spit) specimens (phlegm from coughing), which will be sent to the laboratory for testing under a microscope.
In addition to the normal tests done for TB, additional tests called culture and sensitivity testing, are done on the sputum specimens of people suspected of having MDR TB.
These specialized tests take three to four weeks to reveal growth of the resistant TB bacilli, and to see which drugs will work against the bacteria.
In addition, chest X-rays may be done in certain circumstances to see the extent of any lung damage and for future monitoring of response to treatment.
Can patients with MDR TB be treated and cured?
MDR TB is more difficult to treat than ordinary TB, because the TB bacilli are resistant to the drugs used to treat ordinary TB.
"Second line" TB drugs are used, which are less effective and have more side effects.
Treatment outcomes are not as good as those with drug sensitive TB, partly because MDR TB tends to occurs in people with extensive lung damage who have been on and off TB treatment a long time.
If diagnosed early the chances of cure are much better.
On average, less than 50% of people with MDR TB will be cured, and about 30% will die before completing treatment.
How is MDR TB treated?
Patients with MDR TB will have to take at least 5 different drugs, including a daily injection for 4 months 5 days a week.
During this time most patients with MDR TB are admitted to hospital so that they can be closely monitored for adherence to treatment and to monitor any side effects.
Thereafter patients will need to take at least 3 different drugs for a further 12 – 16 months 5 days a week.
Thus, treatment is much longer than for "ordinary TB" (which takes between 6 to 8 months), and can go on for up to 2 years.
The length of treatment is to ensure that the disease does not relapse.
How can the spread of TB be prevented (including MDR TB)?
When coughing or sneezing, any person and especially those with TB or MDR TB should cover the nose and mouth with a tissue to prevent air-borne spread of the bacilli.
Patients should also avoid spitting into open air/ the ground. Good ventilation of households is strongly recommended, people are encouraged to keep all windows and doors open.
If possible limit prolonged contact (includes avoiding sharing the bedroom at night) with persons with ordinary TB or MDR TB, while their sputum remains positive with TB or MDR TB bacilli.
Can a person with MDR TB continue to work, and if not, are they eligible for a disability grant?
When the patient is taking treatment regularly and once the sputum has been tested and shows that they are no longer excreting MDR TB bacilli, the person can resume working.
This usually takes longer than the usual period of 2 weeks as with "ordinary" TB.
The doctor and TB nurses will monitor the patient closely and will inform the patient when they can go back to work.
If the patient is assessed and declared to be "physically incapacitated" by a medical doctor, they may apply for a temporary disability grant.
Is there a link between HIV/AIDS and MDR TB?
People who are HIV positive are more susceptible to ordinary TB.
There is no evidence that HIV positive people are more susceptible to MDR-TB than to ordinary TB.
Infection with TB also increases illness and progression (morbidity) of HIV, including increasing the death rate (mortality) in HIV infected people.
Thus it is extremely important for TB to be prevented and/or detected and treated as early as possible in HIV infected people.
It is important to remember that even if someone is HIV positive TB can be treated and cured!
Can an HIV infected person or person living with AIDS take both MDR TB and Antiretroviral treatment at the same time?
The two treatments may be taken concurrently.
Close monitoring by an experienced medical doctor is necessary for patients on both therapies.
What is meant by an "outbreak" of MDR TB?
By definition any disease outbreak is the occurrence of more cases of the particular condition than would normally be expected in the particular circumstances.
The disease cases must be epidemiologically linked (that means that medical staff are able to establish definite links between the cases), as opposed to occurring by coincidence.
In the case of an outbreak of MDR TB, how is further spread of the infection prevented?
Once an MDR TB case is suspected, active case finding is undertaken, i.e. we actively look for all persons who may have contracted the infection before they present ill to health facilities.
This is done to limit the potential spread of the infection by as yet undiagnosed persons.
Sputum tests for MDR TB are done and appropriate treatment is offered to confirmed cases.
At the same time, these persons should be removed from the community until they have received treatment and are no longer infectious.
By simply using a condom every time you have sex, you can protect yourself against
Sexually Transmitted Infections (STDs/HIV/AIDS)
Cervical Cancer
Unintended pregnancy.
Do condoms really work in preventing STD’s/HIV and unintended pregnancy?
The simple answer is YES, condoms are effective in preventing both disease and unwanted pregnancy, if they are used correctly and consistently.
Use a condom EVERY time you have sex.
Never use the same condom more than once.
If you are at all uncertain about how to use a condom effectively, ask your health worker, GP or pharmacist for advice.
Other contraceptive methods such as the pill, injection, inter-uterine devices, (IUD) and sterilisation, are very effective at preventing pregnancy, but offer no protection against infections.
If you know you have had unprotected sex, or if you are not sure that you were well-protected you can make use of Emergency Contraception to prevent an unplanned pregnancy.
Emergency Contraception (consisting of a course of pills) can be effective for up to 72 hours after unprotected sex, but the sooner it is taken the better it works.
The insertion of an inter-uterine device (IUD) can be effective for up to five days after unprotected sex.
Both condoms and Emergency Contraception are available free of charge from any state health clinic, or they can be obtained from your GP or Pharmacy.
If all else failed and you are faced with an unwanted pregnancy consult your nearest clinic as early as possible for a termination of pregnancy.
Sexually Transmitted Infections are infections caused by germs that are passed from one person to another mainly during unprotected sex.
Most symptoms are easily noticed and can be treated if reported early to the sister at the clinic.
How will I know if I have an STI?
You may have an STI if you have one or more of the following symptoms.
Discharge from the penis, burning or pain when passing urine.
Abnormal vaginal discharge, smelly, itching, burning or painful urination.
Mild to severe lower abdominal pain, sometimes fever, with or without vaginal discharge.
Sores or blisters on the genitals with or without painful swelling in the groin.
Sores, itching of glands, penis pain.
Scrotal swelling, with or without pain.
If you suspect you have an STI, your health worker will do the following.
History taking.
Physical examination.
Testing for cervical cancer, if necessary, according to protocol.
Correct diagnosis.
Treatment using the syndromic approach or referral if indicated.
Health education.
Counselling.
Voluntary counselling and testing (VCT).
Partner notification slip(s) issued and treatment.
Condom promotion, demonstration and provision.
Referral to other services as indicated (family planning, antenatal care, PMTCT, TB, HIV treatment and care etc).
Record keeping (patient record, daily statistics).
Risk factors associated woth acquiring or having a STI
Any unprotected penetrative sex (anal, vaginal or oral: anal = highest risk; vaginal = high risk; oral = lowest risk).
Frequency of unprotected penetrative sex (the more sex, the higher the risk).
More than one sexual partner.
Sexual coercion, abuse, violence, rape.
Alcohol or drug use in conjunction with sexual activity.
Use of pills or injections for family planning without consistent and correct condom use.
Vaginal douching.
Any penetrative sex in the presence of an STI.
Periodic separation of partners, for example caused by migrant work.
History of recent STI.
Recent still birth, miscarriage or newborn with low weight.
Every Woman over 30 Should Have a Pap Smear. 
What is a Pap Smear?
A pap smear is a simple, quick vaginal examination to check if the cervix (the mouth of the womb) is healthy.
A special instrument called a speculum is used to hold the vagina open so that the doctor or nurse can see the cervix.
Some cells are gently wiped off the cervix and sent to a laboratory for testing.
The results of this test will be sent to your clinic so remember to go back for your results.
Why Should I Go for a Pap Smear?
A pap smear detects abnormal cells that may later become Cancer of the Cervix.
What is Cancer of the Cervix?
Cancer of the Cervix is one of the most common forms of cancer against women.
Cancer of the Cervix if detected early can be treated and cured.
All women are at risk of developing cancer of the cervix.
The risk of developing Cancer of the Cervix increases as you get older.
You are still at risk even if:
you are not sexually active
you are menopausal or have experienced menopause
you no longer plan to have children
you are sterilized
you show no signs or symptoms.
When Should I Go for a Pap Smear?
You should have a pap smear at least every ten years, starting in your thirties.
You should have three FREE pap smears, one in your thirties, one in your forties and one in your fifties.
These FREE pap smears are available at your nearest clinic or health center.
You are entitled:
to three free pap smears in your lifetime, one every ten years, starting in your thirties.
to be treated with dignity, respect and privacy when going for your pap smear.
to ask your health provider to explain the procedure to you.
You must take responsibility for your own health.
You must go back for the results of your pap smear.
You must go for any follow up treatment if advised to do so.
You must give the correct contact details to the health service providers so that they can you if you need further treatment.
WHAT IS MENTAL HEALTH?
Mental health is not merely about the absence of mental illness, but rather the presence of mental health and wellbeing. Mental health is about how you feel about yourself, how you relate to others and how you deal with the opportunities, difficulties and challenges of everyday life.
HOW CAN I OPTIMISE AND MAINTAIN MY SENSE OF MENTAL WELLBEING?
Mental Health is about finding a balance between dealing with the difficulties in life and using the opportunities life presents for further development.
Get to know your Strengths (work at growing these) and Vulnerabilities ( work at overcoming or getting support for these) and learn to recognize when you are not coping and at risk for unhealthy stress.
COPING WITH STRESS
We may not feel mentally healthy or positive about life all the time. Generally, our own strengths or resilience, with support from others, can assist us to bounce back from a crisis or stressful situation during which we are not feeling well balanced in our lives.
Some stress can be challenging and enjoyable (a new job, different responsibilities).
We need to guard against allowing our stress levels to reach the point where we are longer coping with daily lives
THE STRESS TEST
Test your level of stress.
Do you feel tired all the time?	
Do you find it difficult to sleep	
Do you suffer from headaches, ulcers or indigestion?	
Do you find it difficult to concentrate?	
Do you struggle to relax?	
Have you lost interest in sex?	
Have you lost interest in hobbies and other activities which you enjoyed?	
Have you lost your appetite or are you eating more than usual?	
Are you always late for work?	
Do you avoid your colleagues?	
Do you feel angry, irritable or "down in the dumps"?	
Do you bring your work problems home with you at night and over weekends?	
Are you making rash impulsive decisions?	
Do you find it difficult to make decisions?	
If you recognise yourself in the Stress Test, you may be suffering from job stress.
Most of us feel this way for brief periods at some point in our lives.
While there are no easy and quick fixes to some of the problems we have, it is best to take steps to reduce stress at work to regain or protect your mental health.
To take charge of the situation you can:
Reset your priorities, where possible.
Focus on the important things.
Be realistic: Divide projects into manageable tasks, Recognise what you can/cant do.
Be honest with your colleagues/boss: Suggest practical improvements to the situation.
Take care of your physical, mental and personal life: Don't neglect friends and family.
Build in time to relax: Learn to say "no" Lose the guilt about relaxation time.
Get support: Identify people with whom you can share problem and work out solutions.
MENTAL ILLNESS
An important part of maintaining your mental health at home and work is to recognise when you have or may be at risk to develop mental health problems.
Information, and if necessary, assessment and advice about treatment may be obtained from your local community health centre, GP or occupational health nurse or clinic.
Private practitioners such as psychiatrists, clinical psychologists and clinical social workers may also be of assistance.
WHAT IS A MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEM OR MENTAL ILLNESS?
Mental health problems span a wide range of conditions, from milder conditions that could benefit from easily attainable changes in lifestyle and stress levels to more severe conditions which may require hospitalisation and ongoing regular treatment to enable you to manage every day life at home and at work.
Some conditions are more likely to appear at specific periods, for example post-natal depression in new mothers, mental deterioration (Dementia) in the elderly.
Others may appear at any phase of life.
HOW WILL I RECOGNISE THE SIGNS OF MENTAL ILLNESS?
Below is a list of some signs and symptoms in 3 categories within the wide range of possible mental health problems we may experience, to help you do a spot mental health problem check!
Where these symptoms or other regular patterns of relating or behaving interfere with your performance at work or study and disrupt your and your loved one's family and social life, it is possible that you have a mental health problem that requires attention.
Do you constantly feel sad or irritable or both (snappy or tearful)?
Lack interest or pleasure in activites you used to enjoy?
Feel helpless, hopeless guilty and worthless?
Have poor concentration and memory?
have difficulty making decisions?
think about death or suicide?
Feel tired and lack energy?
Have weight gain or loss (no appetite or eating compulsively)?
Have sleep problems (too much or too little), not feel rested?
have agitated or slowed activity levels(time passes too quickly)?
Do you experience feelings of panic, tension or excessive worry?
have fears of dying or losing control?
fear not being able to escape from places, and avoid leaving familiar places?
have feelings of unreality?
fear and avoid social situations?
become light-headed, breathless or dizzy?
have stomach pains, headaches muscle tension or feelings of numbness or tingling?
Are there times when you hear voices, see images, feel or smell things which others do not seem to see?
your head feels empty of thought, your thoughts seem vague and unrelated and difficult to organise?
you have strong beliefs which others cant understand, for example, others want to harm you, or you have special powers and knowledge
you feel others can 'read your thoughts or you can read theirs
your emotional tone becomes 'flat'' or odd to others
your ability to manage daily personal hygiene and tasks deteriorates.
WHAT IS POLIO?
Polio is an illness that causes sudden weakness/lameness of the limbs and sometimes death in children.
The polio virus can be passed easily from one person to another.
The polio virus affects mostly children below 5 years.
PREVENT POLIO
Polio can be prevented by immunisation with polio drops at birth, 6 weeks, 10 weeks, 14 weeks, 18 months and 5 years of age.
HOW DO YOU KNOW IT MAY BE POLIO?
Polio causes sudden weakness or inability to use a leg and/or arm.
In children who are too young to walk, the mother may notice that one of the legs appears floppy and weak.
Community members and parents can help by immediately reporting any child who develops weakness of either an arm and/or leg (without any injury), to the nearest clinic or hospital
When a patient with such weakness is taken to hospital, tests are done to ensure it is not polio
All parents and care givers must take their children to the clinic for polio drops at the correct age
Polio can be prevented
A deformity caused by polio cannot be reversed – it is there for life.
A child is fully protected against polio if he/she gets all prescribed vaccine doses at the correct ages.
Immunisation is free at all Public health facilities.
Immunisation is the most precious gift that we can give to our children.
What is measles? 
Measles is the most dangerous of all childhood diseases.
The first sign is a high fever followed by a blotchy red rash all over the body.
It is also accompanied by cough, a runny nose and red eyes.
Measles can cause dangerous complications, such as infection of the lungs, blindness and death.
What causes measles? 
Measles is caused by a very small germ called the measles virus.
It cannot by seen with the naked eye.
It is spread when a child with measles coughs or sneezes.
Children who suffered from measles cannot get it a second time.
Most children who have been immunised against measles at the right age will not get measles.
Why is measles a dangerous disease? 
Young children, who survive measles are weakened by the disease and may later die from malnutrition or other illnesses.
Measles is also an important cause of mental retardation and blindness.
A quarter of all deaths from measles occur before the age of one year.
Measles in older children usually occur as outbreaks, when large groups of children get measles at the same time.
The risk of a measles outbreak is higher when groups of children gather together for example in creches day care centres and at schools.
Is it important to immunise children during the measles campaign? 
Yes - It is very important to bring children for the extra measles injection.
Children who miss the immunisation might not be fully protected against the measles virus.
I heard that the parents or guardians of children must sign a consent form before a child can receive the extra measles immunisation.
If a child is to be immunised at a school or creche where the parent is not present when the immunisation is given, a consent form will be given to parents or guardians of children in creches, day care centres and at schools in advance.
It provides and opportunity to inform parents or guardians about the extra measles injection.
In this case, if you agree to this immunisation, please complete and sign the form and send it back to the school or creches.
Your child will then receive the immunisation if consent forms are signed and returned on time!
What is Polio? 
Polio is a crippling disease.
It is caused by a very small germ called the polio virus.
Polio can lead to permanent lameness, deformity and even death.
Due to routine immunisations in childhood, polio has not been seen in South Africa since 1989.
However, there have been outbreaks of polio in neighbouring countries.
How will I recognize polio in a child? 
Polio can be suspected when there is sudden weakness of the leg or arm or both or other parts of the body.
This weakness should not have been present at birth.
If the person was injured just before the weakness of the person has a history of being mentally retarded, then polio is not likely to be the cause of the weakness.
Please report any sudden weakness/paralysis in a child under 15 years (not caused by injury), to the nearest clinic, hospital or doctor for investigation.
It could be polio!
Why do we have special campaigns to immunise against polio? 
To give two extra polio immunisations to as many children as possible, at the same time.
This prevents the polio virus from circulating among children.
People talk about the eradication of polio, what does it mean? 
South Africa is taking part in an effort to eradicate polio worldwide.
It means that the virus will be wiped out completely from the face of the earth.
Once the polio virus does not exist any more, children will no longer need to receive polio immunisation.
Is it important to immunise children during the first and second round of the polio campaign? 
Yes - It is very important to bring children for the first and the second round of the polio campaign - even if the child is up to date with the routine immunisations.
To protect children against the polio virus, polio drops need to be given twice.
Children who miss the second round will not be fully protected against the polio virus.
Why do we have measles and polio immunisation campaigns? 
To give extra measles and polio immunisations to as many children as possible, at the same time.
This prevents the measles and polio virus from circulating among children.
Why is the extra measles and polio immunisation for certain age groups only?
The children aged under five years are the group of children who most often become ill with measles and polio and spread the virus.
Is the extra measles and polio immunisation only for children who missed their routine immunisations? 
All children aged between 0 months to under five years must receive the extra immunisations.
Where must I go to make sure that my child does not miss the extra immunisations? 
Talk to your clinic nurse, community leaders and employers about the immunisations.
Look out for immunisation posters and radio announcements that will indicate the way to the nearest immunisation post.
Special efforts will be made to bring immunisation posts as close to your home as possible.
You can also go to your nearest clinic.
Immunisation teams will visit day care centres, creches and schools.
Must I bring my child's immunisation card? 
Yes, please bring it along.
It is always important to take the child's and your own immunisation card with you when you go to a clinic or doctor.
Cards may be checked during one of the rounds to see if a child needs routine immunisations.
But even if your child has lost his/her card or has never had a card, please still bring your child to be immunised.
What will I find at the immunisation post? 
You will be asked if the child is in the age group.
While holding your child, two drops will be given to the child and it will be given again if your child spits it out.
The extra measles injection will be given to children from nine months to under five years of age, on the same day with the polio drops.
Can a sick child get immunisations? 
Yes, all children can be given the immunisations even if they have fever, cough, diarrhoea, malnutrition or any other illness.
If you would like to help eliminate measles and eradicate polio out of South Africa, here is how you can assist or become involved.
Contact your nearest clinic and speak to them.
A clinic nurse will be in charge at the immunisation post during the campaign.
What Is Cancer of the Testes?
It is a rare kind of cancer in men.
It can occur at any age but is more common in young men, 20 to 40 years old.
Often only one testis is affected.
The cause of testicular cancer is unknown.
It affects men at the time they are most concerned about sexual fertility and starting a family.
The rate of men being diagnosed with testicular cancer has grown by more than 50% over the past 20 years.
Which Groups Are at Risk?
Males with a history of undescended testicles (corrected or uncorrected).
The risk increases up to 11-fold.
All infant boys should be checked at birth for undescended testicles.
Men with a family history of testicular cancer.
Men with an infertility problem.
Early Detection
The individual himself detects most abnormalities in the testis.
The best way to find abnormalities is through testicular self-examination (TSE).
TSE is best performed after washing with warm water, a warm bath or shower.
Heat relaxes the scrotum, making it easier to detect any abnormalities.
If you are 18 years and older, follow these steps every month:
Check for any swelling on the scrotum (a mirror may be of assistance)
Examine each testicle with both hands.
Place the index finger and middle finders under the testicle with the thumbs placed on top.
Roll the testicle gently between the thumb and fingers.
Don't be alarmed if one testicle seems slightly larger than the other - this is normal.
Cancerous lumps usually are found on the sides of the testicle, but can also be present in the middle of front of the testis.
Find the soft tube-like structure behind the testicles.
This is called the epididymis, which collects and carries sperm.
Familiarise yourself with this structure.
Do not mistake it for a suspicious lump.
Look for the following:
a small (pea-sized), painless lump in a testicle
note: not all lumps are cancerous
an enlarged testicle
a feeling of heaviness in the testicle or groin
a change in the way the testicle feels
enlarged breasts and nipples
fluid that suddenly accumulates in the scrotum
pain in the testicle.
If you have sever testicular pain - get emergency care.
If any lumps, enlargement, swelling or change in texture can be felt in the scrotum - see a doctor.
If there is a sense of heaviness or pain - see a doctor.
If there is an enlargement of the breasts and nipples and/or a sudden feeling of puffiness in the scrotum - see a doctor.
If no abnormalities are found - continue with TSE until 40/45 years of age.
Testicle cancer is highly curable, especially when detected and treated early.
Removal of one testicle does not impair fertility or sexual function.
By regularly looking at and feeling your breasts, you will know what is normal for you and you will be able to pick up when there are any new or unusual breast changes.
Get to know your breasts, and if you do notice any new or unusual changes, please go to your nearest clinic as soon as possible.
More than 90% of breast lumps are discovered by women themselves.
Breast cancers that are diagnosed early have a better chance of being cured.
So don’t delay if you find a new or unusual change in your breasts.
You might find the following tips helpful in checking your breasts:
Look at your breasts and nipples in the mirror and check for:
A change in the size of shape of your breast or nipple
A change in the skin over the breast such as redness or dimpling
A nipple discharge, rash or inversion
Feel your breasts, remembering to feel up to your collarbone, below your bra-line and under your armpit and check for a new lump or lumpiness, especially if its in one breast
I haven’t noticed any changes in my breasts; do I still need to go for any tests?
A mammogram is an X-ray of the breast.
It is used in older women (usually over 35 years of age).
Younger women’s breasts are too dense which makes it difficult to use this test.
A mammogram can be used to detect a cancer before you notice any changes in your breast.
This is called a “screening mammogram”.
But it may also pick up changes that are not cancer.
Further tests e.g. a Fine Needle Biopsy (taking a sample of breast tissue with a needle) would be needed if the mammogram was abnormal, to then decide if there is a cancer (also called a malignancy).
In some developed countries, mammograms are provided to healthy women over 50 years every 1 to 2 years to try to detect breast cancers at early stages before a lump or other changes are noticed.
Due to the burden of disease on the public health system in South Africa, such a programme cannot be afforded in the public sector for women that do not have any breast complaints.
Mammography services are primarily used for women that have breast complaints or symptoms.
If you are worried and think that you need this test, then you may consult your doctor or nurse for advice.
Be on the look-out for the following changes:
A new lump or lumpiness, especially if it is in only one breast
A change in the shape or size of your breast
A change to the nipple, such as redness, ulceration, crusting or inversion
A nipple discharge that comes without squeezing
A change in the skin of your breast, such as redness or dimpling (like an “orange peel”)
An unusual pain that won’t go away
Swelling or a lump under the arm
Most changes in the breast are not due to cancer, but it is better to have it checked out as soon as possible by a nurse at the clinic.
You may then be referred to a breast clinic for more tests e.g. like a mammogram (breast X-ray) and/or a fine needle biopsy (a sample of the breast tissue is taken for testing).
All breasts have lumpiness that changes with the menstrual cycle.
“Suspicious” or worrying lumps are those that are painless, irregular, unchanging or slowly growing, or new.
9 out of 10 lumps are not cancerous.
Breast cancer is the commonest cancer in women.
In South Africa, 1 in 29 women have the risk of getting breast cancer in their lifetime.
Breast cancer is more common in older women and the majority of women are over 50 years when they are diagnosed.
Breast cancer that is detected early can be treated successfully, and over 80% of women diagnosed with early breast cancer will still be alive in 5 years.
Risk Factors for Breast Cancer
Older women are at a higher risk of getting breast cancer than younger women.
As well as age, the following factors could also put a woman at a higher risk of getting breast cancer:
Being overweight
Drinking alcohol
Not exercising
Not having any children and not breast feeding
Prolonged hormone replacement therapy or combined oral contraceptive. 
Only 5% of breast cancers run in families.
These breast cancers usually happen at a younger age, so someone that has a close family member that had breast cancer before the age of 40 years, might have higher risk of getting breast cancer.
The following things have NOT been found to cause breast cancer:
Using antiperspirant deodorants
An injury or “love-bite” to the breast
Drinking milk
Breast Cancer in Men
About 1% of all breast cancer occurs in men.
It is often first noticed as a lump in one breast that is not painful.
A man who is older and has a strong family history of female or male breast cancer or ovarian cancer may be at a higher risk of developing breast cancer.
Asthma is one of the most common respiratory complaints in the world today.
It affects approximately one in ten children (10%) and one in twenty adults (5%).
It can occur for the first time at any age, even in adulthood.
Although asthma usually begins before the age of five years, a few children affected will "outgrow" it during their teenage years but it usually persists if contracted in adulthood.
Asthma tends to run in families, as do related allergic conditions like hay fever and eczema.
Asthma cannot as yet be cured, but if kept under control, those affected will be able to lead normal lives, enjoying full involvement in sport and all other activities.
What are the Symptoms of Asthma?
Cough, wheeze, tight chest, shortness of breath.
These symptoms are often worse at night and after activity/exercise.
How Can Asthma Affect My Life or the Quality of My Life?
Night time symptoms disturb sleep.
Exercise becomes impaired.
Work or school days are missed (having a family member or child with asthma also leads to days off work to care for them).
Acute attacks and symptoms are troublesome, potentially dangerous and costly.
What Starts an Asthma Attack?
The greatest tragedy of asthma is that it is sometimes not recognised and treated, in which case the patient undergoes needless suffering.
The exact cause of the asthmatic process is not well understood but it is thought to be triggered off by an allergy or when the lungs are irritated by something in the air.
A viral cold or the flu can make asthma symptoms temporarily worse and this effect may last for up to six weeks after the illness.
Asthma attacks are most commonly triggered by allergies to airborne particles of house-dust mites, grass or tree pollens, fungal spores and skin flakes from furry animals such as cats and dogs.
Certain foods and additives can (rarely) also trigger off asthma when eaten.
Pollution in the environment, especially cigarette smoke, car exhaust fumes and certain chemical gases can aggravate an asthma attack.
Even children will be affected if they passively breathe their parents' cigarette smoke into their lungs.
Sport and exercise, particularly in cold weather, can trigger an asthma attack.
However, with the correct treatment asthma can be well controlled so asthmatics should not avoid sport or exercise.
In fact about 10% of Olympic athletes have asthma.
Emotions such as excitement, anger, fear and laughter can all aggravate asthma.
Certain commonly used medicines such as aspirin and other anti-inflammatory tablets may trigger asthma.
Be cautious with using "beta blocker" blood pressure tablets and eye-drops for glaucoma as they can also trigger asthma in adult life.
Air pollutants from highly industrialised areas, cigarette smoking, motor vehicles exhaust fumes, changing feeding practices (refined foods) and changing fuel for combustion (anthracites and coal) have been implicated in the increased prevalence of asthma.
Prolonged exposure to many substances is regarded to be harmful to the lungs, and by law such occupation-induced asthma is compensatable.
How is Asthma Treated?
Asthma cannot be completely cured no matter what anyone says, but with the right treatment most asthmatics will lead completely normal lives.
The aim of treatment should be to make the lungs and breathing tubes as normal as possible so that there are minimal symptoms and as little disruption to ordinary life as possible.
My neighbour said that I should get some medicine to clean my baby's stomach.
Is this important?
Colostrum (the first milk your breast will produce) cleans the stomach.
You will not need any medicines for further cleaning as breast milk is clean and actually lines the stomach, protecting it from bacteria.
In the first few days, if I do not have enough milk, can I give water or other milk as well?
The colostrum is all the baby needs.
You just need to feed the baby often, so that more milk is produced.
Ask the midwife to leave your baby with you after birth so you can put the baby to the breast.
The baby will quickly learn how to suckle and this will help you to produce more milk.
Mixed feeding is not recommended.
I am giving breast milk, but my baby is not satisfied.
Do I need to give formula as well?
No, you can produce more milk by feeding the baby more often.
Allow the baby time to drink until satisfied on one breast to make sure the baby gets hind milk before offering the second breast, which the baby may or may not want.
The more the baby suckles, the more milk is produced.
My baby wants to feed so often; maybe I don't have enough milk?
Maybe the baby is growing quickly and needs more milk.
By feeding often, you can produce enough milk for the baby's need.
The milk will not run out!
Allow extra time for the baby to suckle
Don't pull the baby off the breast.
If the baby has more than six wet nappies every day, is being fed often (at least eight to 12 times a day) and the baby is gaining at least 500 g every month, then you are producing enough milk.
If my baby cries often, what do I do?
Comfort your baby by putting him/her to the breast more often.
Babies need to be close to their mothers.
If your baby is hungry, thirsty or upset, suckling at the breast will satisfy them.
It is unlikely that you will overfeed your baby by giving breast milk only.
Is it good to give other drinks?
No, adding other drinks means that the baby is more likely to get diseases like diarrhoea and pneumonia, especially when the surroundings are unhygienic.
Also, if the baby has other drinks, he/she won't suckle as often and you won't make enough milk.
Does the baby need water when it is hot?
No, the first milk (fore milk) has lots of water and quenches the baby's thirst.
Just make sure you feed your baby often in hot weather.
When should I add other foods?
After six months, continue breastfeeding as before but add other foods as well.
A baby is only ready to start to eat after six months.
If HIV positive, then rapid weaning (after six months) off the breast is recommended.
What if I am HIV positive?
It is important to discuss feeding options with a HIV counsellor before making a choice.
Be sure to use a condom during sexual intercourse to prevent any new infection.
If you have any problems such as painful nipples or breasts, be sure to go to the clinic early for help.
What are the most important things for a mother to remember?
Babies need breast milk only for the first six months of life, and their mothers can produce all the milk their babies need.
The more a baby suckles at the breast, the more milk is produced.
The healthiest babies are exclusively breastfed babies.
Every mother who chooses to exclusively breastfeed her baby for the first six months is doing the best thing she can to help her baby grow and stay healthy.
Not all breastfeeding is the same, and the differences are important:
Exclusive breastfeeding - when the baby receives only breast milk and nothing else.
Mixed feeding - when the baby receives breast milk with other foods, such as milk, water, juice, tea, formula, cereals and baby food.
Mixed feeding can increase the chances of a baby getting infections.
The healthiest babies are the ones who are exclusively breastfed.
Giving the baby formula, water, tea, other drinks, cereal or other foods in the first six months can increase the baby's risk of getting diarrhoea, pneumonia and allergies.
The more the baby suckles at the breast, the more milk will be produced.
The way to produce more milk is to breastfeed the baby more often.
If the baby is given a dummy or drinks from a bottle, they will not suckle often enough from the breast and the mother will produce less milk.
The baby may also become confused about how to suckle and may even refuse the breast.
Breast milk contains all the nutrients and water the baby needs for the first six months of life, thus the baby does not need anything else to drink.
Colostrum (the first milk your breast will produce) cleans the stomach out, and this milk is clean.
No medicines or drinks should be used to clean the stomach.
Although the first milk (fore milk) that comes from each breast looks thin and watery, it is very nutritious.
This milk is meant to quench the baby's thirst.
After the fore milk comes the richer hind milk, which contains extra fat and energy, so the baby will feel full and grow strong.
Let the baby drink until satisfied on one breast, before giving the other breast.
Constipation and diarrhoea are rare in exclusively breastfed babies.
In the first few weeks the babies commonly pass stools with every feed.
Older babies, however, sometimes only pass one soft stool a week, and this is fine.
Working mothers can continue exclusive breastfeeding by expressing breast milk at work and home.
Expressed milk should be left covered in a clean container in a cool place, to be fed to the baby from a cup while the mother is away.
Expressed breast milk will last five to eight hours (room temperature) out of the fridge, and three to five days in a fridge.
When the mother returns home, she should breastfeed her baby as often as possible.
Any abnormalities of body structure or function present at birth.
Some birth defects have genetic (hereditary) causes, whereas in others the causes are non-genetic.
There are many birth defects, ranging from minor abnormalities (e.g. Red-green colour blindness) to serious, sometimes fatal disorders.
Some are visible at birth (e.g. Down syndrome, cleft-lip, club foot); others are not immediately obvious and only manifest themselves later on in life (e.g. diabetes, porphyria).
Whereas some birth defects are conspicuous (e.g. dwarfism), others are hidden (e.g. Congenital heart defects).
Some are rare, while others occur relatively frequently.
How often do birth defects occur?
In South Africa it is estimated that 1 in every 40 babies has one or another birth defect and 1 in 10 will develop an inherited disorder during their lifetime.
What are the causes of birth defects?
The causes of many birth defects are still unknown.
Where the causes are known, birth defects can be classified into three broad categories, viz. Genetic, environmental, and multi-factorial.
Genetic disorders are caused by genetic or hereditary factors, i.e. they can recur in the same family and can be passed from one generation to the next.
Some disorders are caused by external or environmental factors, such as viral infections, medicines, and alcohol that harm the unborn baby; they are not hereditary.
Multi-factorial disorders arise from the interaction between genetic factors and environmental influences; they can recur in families.
Can birth defects be cured?
At present birth defects cannot be cured.
However, in some of these disorders much can be done to alleviate or prevent certain disabilities that could manifest themselves.
Can birth defects be prevented?
Yes, an increasing number of birth defects can be prevented:
By taking 0.4 mg folic acid before falling pregnant and during pregnancy;
By avoiding harmful substances during pregnancy, e.g. alcohol;
By diagnosing them in the unborn baby, e.g. by means of amniocentesis; or
By diagnosing them and starting treatment, if available, as early as possible after birth. 
What is genetic counselling?
Information about the prevention and treatment of birth defects can be obtained by way of genetic counselling.
This involves providing information about the nature and implications of a specific birth defect; giving psychosocial support; and referring the family to appropriate facilities.
The aim of genetic counselling is to provide the information needed for rational decision-making.
Who should seek genetic counselling?
It is advisable to contact a genetic counsellor
If you or your spouse has a birth defect;
If you have a child with a birth defect;
If you have a family history of some genetic disorder;
If you are married to wish to marry a close relative (consanguinity);
If you have had a series of miscarriages or a stillbirth for which no medical reason could be found;
If you are in your late thirties or older and are planning a pregnancy or are pregnant;
If you have been exposed during pregnancy that could have a harmful effect on your unborn baby (e.g. alcohol, irradiation, infections)
