Did you know colon cancer is one of the most common types of cancer?
If detected early, it's also one of the most curable.
A colonoscopy provides the finest in screening because it can both detect and remove polyps before they can turn into colon cancer.
Cleveland Clinic colorectal surgeon James Church, MD, will provide answers to your questions about colonoscopy.
You will also learn who needs to have a colonoscopy and what the risk factors are for colon cancer.
How long does the procedure take?
Am I awake for the procedure?
What are you looking for?
What are the signs of colon cancer?
What’s a polyp?
Are they dangerous?
Are they always removed?
There are different types of ‘oscopies,’ total, sigmoid, others.
When would one type be advised/used over another?
How often should a person get a colonoscopy?
What are some of the early warning signs of colon problems?
What actually causes colon cancer?
Is it just a hereditary risk, poor eating habits, other unhealthy habits (such as smoking or drinking)?
Are there any environmental factors (living in industrial areas; living in certain areas of the country)?
What are the best foods to eat to lower my risk of colon cancer?
Besides foods, is there anything else to lower my risk?
Wow, those are a lot of questions!
But they are good questions!
I will do my best to answer I am having a colonoscopy in the next few days.
My question is: I had bacterial endocarditis in 1979.
Is a colonoscopy an invasive procedure whereby I need to take amoxicillin prior to the procedure?
Colonoscopy can potentially cause bacteremia, the presence of bacteria in the bloodstream; however, so can brushing your teeth.
I am a little nervous of your history because you may have developed irregularities in your heart valves that would make you at higher than average risk of more endocarditis.
Do you have a heart murmur?
I am not sure I missed one of the questions I submitted.
I had three stents put in seven months ago.
I am on Plavix® (clopidogrel bisulfate) and two 81mg aspirins.
I have been told to have a colonoscopy now.
Should I wait until the year is up?
As long as you are not at high risk for colorectal cancer you can wait a while.
If you were my patient, I would do the colonoscopy without stopping the Plavix® or aspirin to see what we find.
If we find nothing, or even a couple of tiny harmless polyps, then that is it for now.
If we were to find a significant polyp that need to be removed, then the Plavix® and aspirin (because you take two tablets) both need to be stopped for five days before and five days after the exam.
I would clear this with your cardiologist to see if he or she thinks you need "bridging" treatment with Lovenox® (enoxaparin).
Is a person with a factor XI deficiency treated any differently with respect to colonoscopies than other patients?
The whole question of patients with coagulation problems, either "natural" from a factor deficiency or acquired from an anticoagulant such as Coumadin (warfarin) or Plavix®, is a tricky area.
The main risk comes when polyps are removed.
Therefore a screening colonoscopy could be done without stopping anticoagulation or without factor transfusions.
Then, if nothing is found, all is well.
I used a Fleet® enema to prepare for my first and only colonoscopy.
My Mom had to drink a thick liquid and got really sick.
What is the best and easiest prep for a colonoscopy?
I am afraid there is no alternative to having diarrhea as you flush out all of the stool by drinking a large amount of fluid.
The only differences in preparations are the volumes, the timing, and the taste of the fluid.
All current preps are designed to cause diarrhea without draining any of your own fluids out of your body.
These types of preps avoid dehydration.
I had a colonoscopy a few years ago and had a prep that was a little bottle that I mixed with clear soda.
My husband just had his colonoscopy, and he had to use the GoLytely® prep.
He had a difficult time drinking it all.
Couple of questions: Does the prep that I had still exist or is it off the market?
If you have to drink the GoLytely® and you are a petite person, do you have to drink it all or can you have a less amount because you are smaller?
As per my answer to a prior question, the "little bottle" (sodium phosphate prep) is off the market.
Sorry about that.
I am having this procedure done on Monday, and I was wondering if they will put me under with an anesthetic, or is the patient awake?
Thanks for your time, it is greatly appreciated.
You are welcome.
As I mentioned earlier, the amount of sedation given varies according to the wishes of the patient, the skill of the endoscopist, and the difficulty of the examination.
While some patients prefer to be put completely to sleep, others like to be completely awake with no sedation at all.
That has the advantage of avoiding the need for a driver and allowing you to do some work after the exam (if anyone would ever want to).
My mother-in-law was given tablets to take instead of the liquid prep.
She was in Virginia.
Is there such a thing here, in Cleveland?
The sodium phosphate tablets are no longer on the market here.
I guess it is possible that some drug stores still have them, but they are off the market for a reason.
The kidney damage can lead to a need for transplant.
After a colonoscopy, are there any restrictions initially about eating, driving, returning to work etc.?
Your ability to work is determined by the sedation and pain relief you have had.
We discourage patients from driving for at least eight hours after getting any sedative or narcotic.
If you need or want to work, see about a colonoscopy without sedation.
What types of polyps are always cancerous?
How often should they be checked?
There are two main types of polyps that are precancerous: adenomas and serrated polyps.
However, only about 1 in 100 adenomas will ever become cancer.
The bigger they are (which means the longer they have been there), the more likely they are to be on their way to cancer.
As polyps get closer to cancer, their cells start to look wilder and wilder.
This is called dysplasia.
Polyps with severe dysplasia are very close to cancer.
We pay very close attention to them.
I hope that this answers your question.
Remember, that although only 1 in 100 polyps will turn into cancer, every cancer starts off as a polyp.
I recently had a colonoscopy in which my biopsy results showed no cancer; only tubercles were found.
The doctor who performed the test wants me to have another scope in three months to make sure he didn't miss anything.
What is the normal protocol for frequency since my only risk factor is being overweight?
From the research I did, my initial colonoscopy did not increase my risk level, since tubercles were the only thing found, which appear to have no risk of becoming cancerous the way polyps can, which I did not have.
I am not sure what you mean by "tubercles."
If you mean tubular adenomas, then these are pre-cancer polyps.
The normal time to do a follow-up colonoscopy depends on several things.
The first thing to think of is the likelihood of the colonoscopist missing a polyp.
This likelihood is higher if the colon is not well-prepared or if it is particularly twisty and difficult to examine.
Often, a poor preparation and twistiness go together.
The second factor is the "proneness" of the colon to produce polyps.
We estimate this by the family history (zero in your case) and the number and type of polyps found.
If a patient has three precancerous polyps in a well-inspected colon, we recommend follow-up in three years.
One precancerous polyp in a well-inspected colon means follow-up in five years.
Could you please explain the "swallowing the camera" colonoscopy?
Is there a great deal of radiation exposure?
The pill camera colonoscopy is not ready for general use yet; it is still a research test.
The pill camera test for the small intestine is in use, however, and is a valuable addition to our options for checking the small intestine.
The reasons it works better in the small bowel than the colon are that: (1) it only takes two to three hours to get through the small bowel, but can take up to 36 hours to get through the colon; (2) the small bowel is easy to get clean but the colon is not easy to keep clean; (3) the colon is a much wider organ than the small bowel, with many more nooks and crannies.
Does the Cleveland Clinic use the capsule colonoscopy?
Not yet.
We do small bowel capsule routinely.
The best option for screening the colon for polyps and preventing cancer is a colonoscopy.
This is because colonoscopy is the most accurate option and the only one that allows removal of the precancerous polyps.
Having said that, colonoscopy can be difficult in some people for a variety of reasons.
If a person with well-controlled celiac disease had a colonoscopy at 50 with completely normal results, when should the next colonoscopy be (no immediate family members with colon cancer but maternal uncle had it)?
Celiac disease doesn't affect risk of colorectal cancer, although some of the symptoms can mimic symptoms caused by colorectal cancer.
Therefore, the interval to the next colonoscopy from a baseline screening examination in a patient at average risk can be eight years.
I say eight instead of 10 because the approximate interval from the appearance of a precancerous polyp to a cancer is 10 years.
Therefore there is little sense in waiting 10 years.
I recently had an ileocolic resection due to Crohn's disease, will it be possible to see through a colonoscopy if the Crohn's has come back?
Yes.
In fact colonoscopy is the best way to check for recurrent Crohn's.
Crohn's likes to come back just upstream of an anastomosis, so it’s a likely spot.
However, studies have shown that when patients with an ileocolic anastomosis for Crohn's disease are scoped one year after the surgery, 75 percent will have some ulcers in the area.
Would aspirin therapy (81mg) and a stent be treated with the same precautions as Plavix® or other anticoagulants?
Do you recommend that normal patients get a fecal occult test annually in addition to colonoscopies at appropriate intervals?
No.
It doesn't make sense to me.
Sometimes patients do this and get a positive Hemoccult® because of hemorrhoids or eating rare steak.
Then they need another colonoscopy to make sure that there is not a missed cancer.
Of course there is always the possibility that colonoscopy will miss something serious, but this possibility is low and doesn't justify everyone getting Hemoccults as well.
You are welcome.
