Every life includes stress, and in some cases it can be beneficial.
The stress of a deadline can increase productivity or performance, for example.
How many acupuncture treatments does it take to relieve stress?
Is this something that needs continual treatment?
There is an individual response to each treatment session.
Typically, I would recommend a minimum of one session per week for five to eight treatments total until you reach a therapeutic effect and start to feel better.
Can you address breathing and stress?
Studies are showing mindful breathing will immediately engage the parasympathetic nervous system, which is the aspect of the nervous system that is responsible for the relaxation response.
What are the indicators that may lead to consider medication to treat stress?
What specialist would best determine this?
Does this apply to children, too?
When stress is causing life-altering or life-threatening anxiety, then there may be a more immediate need for medication.
Medications are needed for adults and children when they cannot function in their day-to-day activities.
Once stabilized, integrative therapy can be started.
Long-lasting solutions can be addressed with integrative medicine.
Children can benefit also from this.
I am 53 and going through menopause.
I never experienced a panic attack until menopause.
Acupuncture and yoga have been very helpful.
Are you familiar with Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT); and if so, do you think it is effective in calming anxiety and fear?
I have not heard of Emotional Freedom Technique, but by its name alone, it sounds like it is a way to get in touch with your feelings.
Possibly a holistic psychotherapist would be one to consult.
Here at Cleveland Clinic Center for Integrative Medicine, we have a holistic psychotherapist.
If you are in the area and would like an appointment, please call 216.986.4325.
What exactly is a holistic psychotherapist?
How is their approach different?
Quoting from the Zivia Bairey, LISW-S, ACHT and the chat transcript from 9/14/2010 What are the advantages of very tiny needles that are inserted and left in place for a week or two, or even longer?
I have only read about this as a treatment for other medical issues.
Is this recommended for stress and anxiety?
I get very bad anxiety attacks.
I was diagnosed at Cleveland Clinic with fibromyalgia, and my rheumatologist explained that I have 'central sensitization syndrome,' which causes an overreaction to stimuli, especially stress.
I am desperate to find a way to reduce these reactions.
I currently take a wonderful yoga class three times a week and recently stopped working because of two near collapses.
Would integrative medicine be of benefit to someone like me?
I think it’s wonderful that you are being proactive in your treatment plan.
Integrative medicine would definitely be a great option for you to explore.
I am a 19-year-old female.
I have been diagnosed with depression.
I have been on various anti-depressants.
I am running out of options where I don't have side effects.
What are some other treatment options besides medications that have been helpful with young adults?
Great question!
You can consider adding specific supplements to your antidepressants and augment them, hopefully allowing you to take lower doses.
This is something that would be addressed in an integrative medicine consult.
So, what you’re saying is, you would work directly with the therapist to determine this?
We would rely heavily on a therapist to determine the treatment plan, whether it is in an individual or group session.
The integrative physician would monitor progress with follow-up visits.
I am looking for a treatment without prescribed medications for high blood pressure.
Integrative medicine may have an approach that works for you.
Integrative medicine would address lifestyle and nutrition, and recommend therapies that are evidence-based to address the high blood pressure.
Examples would be Reiki, acupuncture, massage, and mind body (holistic psychotherapy), as these approaches engage the parasympathetic nervous system.
If blood pressure goals are not met, it is imperative to have your blood pressure maintained, even if it means medication.
The integrative medicine team will work with you and your physician to have a team approach in managing your condition.
I have seasonal affective disorder.
When at its worse, my stress levels are very high.
I have been on medication for 45 years.
I also have psychotherapy and use exercise.
All is great, but should I consider getting off the medications or leave well enough alone?
What suggestions would you have for me concerning alternate treatments?
An integrative physician could try adding supplements and integrative therapy and then attempt weaning off medication.
We recommend doing this in combination first.
I have been getting excellent help for my adrenal insufficiency and hypogammaglobulinemia through a combination of low-dose steroids (Cortef©- hydrocortisone oral) rest, stress coaching, and a number of recommended supplements.
My problem is that about 70 percent of the time, taking the supplements is upsetting to my stomach, and I am finding it harder and harder to motivate myself to take them.
Is there a method I could use that will help?
I do take them with food, but often I get sick enough that I have to lie down for half an hour before the significant discomfort subsides.
You may want to add ginger or DGL (which is a form of licorice), which helps with nausea.
Most drug stores carry the Sea-Bands.
(This would be an application of acupressure.) www.sea-band.com I use ginger tea, ginger chews, and ginger in many meals and it is helpful when the discomfort isn’t so intense.
Where can one get Sea-Bands?
Do your acupuncturists have Sea-Bands or know where to get them?
Most drug stores carry the Sea-Bands.
(This would be an application of acupressure.) www.sea-band.com Is DGL a supplement available in pharmacies, health supply stores, etc.?
Yes, you may find it available in both places.
The important thing is not to get plain licorice.
Make sure it has DGL.
An office visit to evaluate all your supplements would be a good idea.
Will Medicare or other medical plans pay for acupuncture?
Medicare and Medicaid do not cover acupuncture.
Other insurance plans are variable and, therefore, you would need to contact your insurance carrier or human resources department.
Most flexible spending accounts may be applied.
How are stress and exercise related?
Exercise has been shown in studies to improve sleep and immune function (which allows people to be more resilient and resist stress).
It does not have to be high-intensity exercise.
Anyone can find benefits from walking or even yoga, which has been shown to lower blood pressure.
Assuming insurance would not cover something like Reiki, what is the approximate cost of one session?
First, verify with your insurance that it is not covered.
If it is an out-of-pocket expense, you should call the CIM for the updated cost.
216.986.4325.
To make an appointment with Integrative Medicine Physician Brenda Powell, MD, or Lead Acupuncturist Jamie Starkey, LAc, please call 216.444.8111.
