What are the signs of ADHD in children?
Are there things that can be done to reduce the symptoms without using medication?
Also, can a child with ADHD still be an A/B student?
Or do most children with ADHD struggle with academics?
The core symptoms of ADHD are: inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity.
How is ADHD diagnosed in children?
A thorough assessment typically involves a structured diagnostic interview with the patient (and other informants if possible), completion of questionnaires that provide the patient’s medical, social, family, and educational/occupational histories, and completion of emotional-behavioral rating scales that provide information about the presence and severity of symptoms.
How do you get a school to help your child after diagnosis?
All they want to do is punish.
One of the best strategies is not to punish the teacher or the other school personnel back.
It is always best to establish a cooperative relationship with the school from the start.
If this cannot be achieved, then it is certainly appropriate to seek an advocate.
To locate an advocate in Cuyahoga County, for example, parents may contact the educational service center atwww.esc-cc.org What do you think of class meetings where students do nothing but complain about an ADHD student’s behavior?
Complaining is never productive; it only propagates a problem.
A more effective strategy is to turn the complaint into a request and take it the person who can do something about it.
Busy teachers frequently push parents to medicate children.
Is this desirable or would a parent be better off home schooling with help from school systems?
Conversations about medicines are always engaged with a physician.
It is true that many children work very well one-to-one when they are home-schooled.
This does not, however, work with many children, and it is best to be with their peers in a classroom.
This is a decision only a parent can make.
Home-schooling is most effective when an adult provides a high level of one-to-one engagement with academic work.
My experience with Ritalin (methylphenidate) in generic form hasn't been great with regard to severe headaches.
I've read on the Internet by users that the brand Ritalin does not have as many side effects.
Do you have any experience with this?
Assuming that you are referring to brand versus generic, if headaches are so severe that they do not outweigh the benefits, then most physicians would tell you to change the method of delivery of the medicine that you are taking or to actually change medicines, such as using a generic delivery system for dexamphetamine.
It is best under such circumstances to talk to your physician.
Is there a benefit to taking breaks from ADHD medication when not in school?
Using medicine as it is prescribed by the physician is always advised.
Structured treatment interruptions, otherwise known as drug holidays, are often recommended by physicians when demand is low (such as during summertime or long breaks from school).
However, if a child's behavior impairs his or her functioning and intrudes on the functioning of others, medication without holidays is likely going to be the recommendation of the physician.
What is considered 'normal' behavior in a child?
And who defines that?
Normal is only a setting on your clothes dryer in the laundry room.
When we look at mental health conditions, we look for clustering of symptoms that represent a global condition.
The American Psychiatric Association has taken these clusters and given each a name that defines the condition.
There are nine symptoms for inattention that tend to cluster together and nine symptoms for hyperactivity/impulsivity that cluster together.
We call this ADHD.
What does the term self-efficacy mean?
Self-efficacy relates to teaching a person to act effectively in the world around him or her.
What other methods can be used with children to minimize the effects of ADD/ADHD without the use of medication?
Can you tell me more about behavior modification?
What does that entail?
Behavioral treatment, often called behavior modification, is not about changing a child's behavior and it is about changing the behavior of parents and teachers, who are the primary change agents in a child's life.
Many times, and without realizing it, parents and teachers behavior is shaped by the child.
Parents learn to yell loudly, for example, because it often will stop the child's behavior immediately.
However, in the long run, the behavior persists and sometimes even gets worse.
Do patients with ADD or ADHD typically have other mental/emotional challenges i.e., depression, mania, etc.?
If so, can you recommend a good source for reviewing drug interactions?
I realize you cannot advise treatment.
Yes, there are often co-morbidities, especially with adults.
The question you ask about drug interactions is a very important one.
There is current research, for example, that indicates stimulants are safe to use with some antidepressants.
However, this is not medical advice, and any polypharmacy should be under the direct supervision of a licensed medical doctor.
A good Web site that discusses this issue is theCHADD.orgwebsite.
ADHD to bipolar in adulthood?
Is this a theory?
Would appreciate a bib with official transcript?
There is no research that indicates that ADHD later results in bipolar disorder; however, there is a strong relationship between the co-morbidity of ADHD and bipolar disorder.
For example, more people with ADHD end up showing symptoms of bipolar disorder than occurs in the typical population.
TheCHADD.orgwebsite may be helpful in this area for articles.
Can adult ADHD symptoms begin in adulthood or was it just unrecognized as a child?
By current definition, ADHD does not have adult onset.
Clinical dysfunction due to ADHD symptoms may emerge in adulthood, but you must consider these symptoms to have been developed and possibly been unrecognized since childhood.
In other words, there is no such thing as adult-onset ADHD.
What treatment do you suggest for someone diagnosed at age 20?
The treatments for young adults are the same as those for younger and older people.
The combination of behavioral therapy and pharmacotherapy (medicine) typically shows the best results.
This is especially true for young adults who may be in college or starting work.
Knowing that "pills do not teach skills" is helpful to keep learning skills of organizing, relating to others, and managing responsibilities, such as bills and the like.
These don’t happen just by taking medicine, they happen by exercising the skills that get the job done.
Many therapists are very capable of teaching these skills, as are behavioral coaches.
For adults with ADHD, I would think this condition jeopardizes a lot of relationships.
Any advice for someone in a relationship with an adult with ADHD to help understand the issues that go along with this condition?
Relate to the adult with ADHD not only from the aspect of what they do but also from who they are as a committed partner in the relationship.
Many adults with ADHD do not do the things they do intentionally.
Rather than focusing on the individual and trying to 'fix them,' focus on what will work in order to handle the responsibilities and intimacies of the relationship.
There are many good books written about this topic.
You can go to the ADD Warehouse online to find a number of them.
Does ADHD/ADD tend to run in families?
I swear my husband and his family are all affected except for his father.
ADHD does tend to run in families.
People who have been diagnosed with ADHD typically have a family member who also has ADHD.
Many adults do not realize it until their child is diagnosed.
I want to leave you with something to think about that we use here at Cleveland Clinic Behavioral Medicine…..Having a child or adult with ADHD is like climbing a mountain with no summit.
You must fall in love with climbing.
To make an appointment with any of our pediatricians or pediatric specialists at Cleveland Clinic Children's Hospital, please call 216.444.KIDS (5437) or call toll-free 800.223.2273, ext.
5437.
You can also visit us online atwww.clevelandclinic.org/pediatrics Some participants have asked about upcoming web chat topics.
If you would like to suggest topics, please use our contact linkclevelandclinic.org/webcontact.
