The eye’s lens (behind the iris) is typically clear and functions to focus light as it passes to the back of the eye.
Cataract is a condition characterized by clouding of the natural lens, usually as a result of normal changes due to aging.
What are the various types of cataracts?
The major types of cataracts are nuclear sclerosis, cortical, and posterior subcapsular.
Do both eyes generally progress at the same rate?
Generally they do, but it varies a lot from person to person.
Do cataracts cause long-term problems?
Ordinarily, the only issue is progressively diminished vision.
Occasionally a surgeon may recommend cataract surgery in order to decrease problems with glaucoma or corneal dystrophies.
When would you recommend having your cataracts removed?
Cataract surgery is appropriate when your lifestyle is significantly compromised by your vision.
Can cataracts be prevented?
Not really.
Most cataracts are due to normal aging.
Some cataracts are associated with diabetes, so blood sugar control may be preventive.
Some cataracts are associated with corticosteroid use.
Decreasing the dose, if medically possible, might help.
Exposure to bright sunlight, especially reflected light -- as off the water -- should be avoided.
A healthy diet including anti-oxidants could also be useful.
When is cataract surgery not recommended?
For example, if you have cataract in one eye only and 30 percent vision in other eye.
Cataract is a normal aging change.
It is not damaging to have a cataract in the eye.
Within reason, the results of surgery are the same whether it is done early or late.
The patient can decide if and when to have surgery based on how he or she is functioning and knowing the risks involved in the surgery.
Occasionally, the surgeon will recommend surgery because the cataract is becoming so dense that it would be technically difficult to perform the surgery if you were to wait.
I have been told that I might benefit by having cataract surgery.
I only want to do distance seeing.
Can a person only do one eye?
What are the dangers of cataract surgery?
I have been told (not by a medical person) that the retina can detach more easily.
Yes.
You can have only one eye done.
Many patients only have cataract surgery in one eye.
Years ago, when cataract surgery was more invasive, there was a distinct increase in risk of retinal detachment associated with the operation.
Nowadays, if the retina is otherwise normal, the risk is minimal.
How do you predict refraction in cataract surgery?
The calculations are based on measurements of the corneal curvature and the length of the eye.
If an eye has had bad cataract surgery, can the other eye have a newer lens for near and far?
I would recommend against that as there are more complications with the near and far lens implant.
I would recommend a conventional mono-focal lens in the second eye.
As I get older, it takes longer for my eyes to focus from near to far or far to near.
Does this situation improve with cataract surgery?
No.
Cataract surgery does not improve this.
You will likely require bifocal or reading glasses.
What is the recovery after cataract surgery?
This depends on the surgical technique.
In general, the patient is up and about immediately after surgery with normal activities that are not strenuous.
The patient cannot drive on the day of surgery because of sedation.
By the next day the patient can read, drive, and engage in most routine activities.
After cataract surgery, how often does one need to be checked?
Surgeons have different protocols and preferences.
Ordinarily the day after surgery and one month post-surgery.
It is also important that you have a way to contact your surgeon at any time of the day should you have problems.
Is it normal for some people to have trouble reading after cataract surgery?
No.
With appropriate glasses, reading should not be a problem if the eye is otherwise healthy.
What can or should be done about the bright glare after cataract surgery?
Most patients have fewer problems with glare after cataract surgery, especially if the lens implant is mono-focal.
Sometimes glare may be due to scar tissue forming around the lens implant in which case laser surgery may help.
Are headaches and/or dizziness normal after surgery or would this indicate a problem?
Headaches and/or dizziness are not usual, and in my experience they are likely to be unrelated to the surgery.
What are the signs or symptoms that would indicate a problem after surgery?
Pain, redness, discharge, and blurred vision.
Can you continue to wear contact lenses after cataract surgery?
Yes you can.
In some cases, when cataract surgery is performed, the focusing power of the eye can be changed, making contact lenses unnecessary.
Can some of the symptoms of cataracts be corrected with eye glasses?
Yes, temporarily.
It is common for cataracts to change the focusing power of the eye, and often glasses will improve distance vision or near vision, or both.
My mother had cataract surgery about three years ago and no longer needed her glasses.
She now once again needs reading glasses.
Is this normal?
How long does the effect of surgery usually last?
This is not uncommon.
The shape of the eye continues to changes throughout one's lifetime.
Is there more than one type of lens that is used for cataract surgery?
If so what are they and is one better than another?
What are the advantages of one type of lens over another?
There are three major kinds of lens implants used for cataract surgery.
The standard approach is a mono-focal lens.
This gives good vision at either distance or near, but not both.
Glasses probably will be needed after the surgery.
If I change my mind about the type of replacement lens after cataract surgery, can it be replaced?
Yes, but it is not always easy and it is far better to make the right choice first.
Can a replacement lens cloud up?
The lens itself does not cloud up; but in approximately 15 percent of patients, the membrane behind the implant does.
If this happens, it is generally treatable with a YAG laser.
This is a procedure done in the office with excellent results.
I had the Restor implant in the eye about a week ago and have my right eye scheduled for three weeks from now.
My distance vision is great!
However, my near to mid vision did not improve so well.
Could this be from the type of implant (lens) or is this normal?
Will the other eye be for close/mid-range vision perhaps?
What you are telling me is not uncommon.
It is important for your surgeon to know this, as it may change the lens selection in the second eye.
Frequently, patients with Restor lenses do much better after surgery on the second eye.
How does one make the best informed decision as to the correct lens?
The best way to do this is a conversation with your ophthalmologist.
It is important to have the give-and-take of conversation rather than using written material.
You mentioned long or short vision lenses for cataract surgery.
Do you need to choose one over the other?
How about a golfer who reads?
You have to choose.
Some patients will choose to have one eye corrected for distance and the other eye for near.
This may, however, not be a good choice for a golfer who might desire more balanced vision.
On the other hand, it may be a good excuse for a missed putt!
Can you please touch on cataract surgery with Fuchs dystrophy?
Fuchs’ dystrophy of the cornea makes the cornea more susceptible to damage with routine cataract surgery, even in the best of hands.
It may even lead to the need for a corneal transplant.
What is the increased risk in cataract surgery with pseudoexfoliation?
If you are diagnosed with glaucoma and have been suspect-base line tested with no progression for eight years, is it reasonable to assume you have a congenital large cup?
In pseudoexfoliation, the attachments of the cataractous lens (zonules) can be fragile, leading to technical difficulties in accomplishing the surgery and an increased risk of subsequent dislocation of the implant lens.
Can you have cataract surgery if you have glaucoma and or macular degeneration?
Yes.
I had a detached retina with my first cataract surgery 10 years ago.
Is that likely to happen with my second cataract surgery in the near future?
You probably are at an increased risk for retinal detachment in the second eye.
I have read that having cataract surgery if you have a drug eluting stent may place you at high risk of a stent thrombosis.
What are your recommendations to such a patient to prevent this catastrophic event?
I am unaware of this problem and would recommend that you discuss this with your cardiologist.
Are cataract surgery and cosmetic surgery compatible?
Yes.
They should be done in separate procedures.
I had cataract surgery (both eyes) in 2007.
When I come in from the outdoors, I have difficulty seeing for several minutes.
Is this common?
It is fairly common since more light gets into the eyes than prior to cataract surgery.
You should mention this to your ophthalmologist during your routine eye exams.
Explain how broken cataracts develop and how to deal with them.
I am 59 going on 60.
Does this have something to do with it?
I am not familiar with the term 'broken cataracts.'
Use of n-alpha-acetylcarnosine drops for cataracts.
I am not aware of any reputable studies that show they work.
I had cataract surgery and laser.
Will seeing closely with bright light affect my eyes?
No.
Can untreated cataracts eventually lead to untreatable blindness?
As a direct cause, this would be extremely unlikely.
However, if the cataracts are dense enough, they may prevent adequate examination of the retina.
For example, this could lead to a lost opportunity to diagnose and treat retinal disease such as macular degeneration
