Syncope -- also called fainting, blacking out, or passing out -- is a sudden loss of consciousness, followed by a fall from a standing or sitting position.
It is a condition that is caused by a decrease in blood flow to the brain.
Blood contains oxygen, so when blood flow to the brain decreases, oxygen to the brain also decreases.
To make an appointment withManikum Moodley, MBChB, or any of the specialists in the Neurological Institute’s Center for Pediatric Neurology at Cleveland Clinic, please call 866.588.2264.
You can also visit us online atwww.clevelandclinic.org/pediatricneurology Does my child have a type of seizure?
When a child goes to the doctor or to the emergency room with what looks like syncope, one of our differential diagnoses -- something we need to rule out -- would be a seizure disorder.
What are the causes of syncope and how common is it?
Syncope has numerous causes; but in children, the most common cause is a simple faint, which is also called 'vasovagal syncope,' 'vasodepressive syncope,' or 'neurocardiogenic syncope.'
What triggers fainting and how can we prevent fainting?
Triggers of syncope in kids include What is psychogenic syncope?
One of the most important causes of syncope in pediatric patients, in particular adolescents, is psychogenic syncope.
Several features will help a physician to distinguish psychogenic from neurocardiogenic syncope.
My child often gets dizzy and lightheaded.
When this happens, I just give him something to eat.
Does he need to see a doctor?
Dizziness in children can have several causes.
It could be a pre-syncopal symptom; it could occur prior to a migraine; it could be related to an inner ear problem (for example, labrynthitis from a viral infection); or it could be due to a cardiac lesion.
Sometimes, we know my son is about to faint because he gets very lightheaded.
Are there any other signs we should look for?
An episode of fainting is typically preceded by a period called a prodrome that can last from several seconds to one to two minutes.
This period usually has distinctive warning features such as If my child is fainting, does he have a serious heart condition?
Will he die if he has another attack?
If a child presents with syncope, the first thing to look for would be a cardiac cause.
However, it is less common than vasovagal syncope.
How does a ‘history’ help you make a diagnosis of syncope?
The patient history is the cornerstone on which the diagnosis of syncope is made.
Important points in the history include What tests will my child have to find the cause of her fainting attacks?
The doctor can use certain diagnostic tests for a child with frequent fainting attacks.
Before diagnosing syncope, it is important to rule out other causes, such as seizure disorders or cardiac problems as the reason for the fainting.
What happens during a tilt table test?
The test is done by positioning the patient head upright at an angle of 60-80 degrees for 15 to 60 minutes on a tilt table with a supporting footboard.
The test is positive when the symptoms of syncope or pre-syncope are reproduced.
What is the treatment of syncope?
Once a diagnosis of neurocardiogenic or vasovagal syncope is confirmed, treatment requires Will a child have this problem all his life?
The prognosis for recovery is excellent in neurocardiogenic syncope.
Most patients show spontaneous recovery of their syncope and presyncope in the first year after onset.
Five percent to 10 percent, will, however, continue to show symptoms over an extended period of time, often up to five years.
