What do changes in a woman's menstrual cycle mean?
My cycle has gotten a lot heavier and with more clotting.
I also now have cramping.
I am 43.
Any changes in the menstrual cycles that last for more than two to three months should be evaluated by your gynecologist.
Causes of bleeding can range from fibroids to endometrial cancer.
Most often a benign cause is found.
Some women have no etiologies detected; however, medication may be used during the menstrual cycle to decrease menstrual flow.
There are several new medications available within the last two years that may dramatically decrease menstrual bleeding and solve your problem without surgical intervention.
Why did my heavy bleeding start again after having a D&C?
The evaluation of heavy uterine bleeding has evolved.
It is important that a component of surgery and evaluation includes hysteroscopy.
This test should be coupled with a D&C so that the physician can view the area of menstruation.
A D&C alone is not diagnostic or therapeutic.
Therefore, if you have already undergone a surgical D&C, I would recommend that you restart another office evaluation with a saline infusion sonogram.
This comprehensive visualization will more thoroughly evaluate causes of bleeding.
A D&C alone may have missed a focal growth that can contribute to heavy menstrual periods.
Please feel free to contact my office to schedule a consultation, and I will determine the next steps.
Please bring a copy of any testing you have had done, including surgery and results to the appointment.
The appointment number is 216.444.6601.
What are the most common signs that you are going into menopause?
Symptoms of menopause often begin before the last menstrual period.
Many women experience no symptoms and others have variable symptoms.
Changes in menstrual cycles (skipping periods, more than one period a month, change in menstrual flow, including duration and amount) often occur one to seven years before the periods stop.
Additionally, hot flashes, night sweats, vaginal dryness, decreased libido, and change in mood and memory can occur.
Since hitting menopause three years ago, I have no libido.
None.
I am not on any HRT, just taking one day at a time through the flashes and anxiety attacks.
Will my libido ever return; and even though it doesn't bother me that it is gone, do I need medical attention for this?
It is common that libido decreases with aging.
Currently, there are no FDA-approved medications for decreased libido.
There are other causes for decreased libido, including an underactive thyroid gland, elevated prolactin levels, depression, alcohol abuse, and an unsatisfactory interpersonal relationship with your sexual partner.
All of these issues and more should be discussed with a physician.
We are fortunate to have a national leader in sexual health at Cleveland Clinic who provides expert evaluation and treatment options.
Dr. Margery Gass (OB/GYN) may be contacted for an appointment by calling 216.444.4HER (216.444.4437).
She is excellent!
Please consider getting a second opinion with a urogynecologist who has experience with pelvic floor dysfunction following pelvic reconstruction surgery and mesh procedures.
We have five board certified urogynecologists here at Cleveland Clinic that can provide a second opinion.
I am 42.
When having sex, I am now experiencing vaginal dryness.
I have never had this problem before.
Is there a way to treat this without just using creams during sex?
You are considered perimenopausal.
This means that your estrogen levels are changing.
Due to a decline in estrogen, vaginal dryness is common.
A physician can prescribe an estrogen tablet, estrogen ring, or estrogen cream, which after 8 to10 weeks improves lubrication.
See your doctor for evaluation and treatment options.
I am in my 50s and am having very heavy, uncomfortable periods.
My doctor told me that my ultrasound showed I have a large uterine fibroid.
What is the latest on UAE/UFE versus hysterectomy?
Will an abdominal hysterectomy compromise my abdominal muscles long-term?
There are many options for treating heavy menstrual cycles related to uterine fibroids.
The size, number, and location of the fibroid often determine treatment options.
Hysterectomy should always be the last option.
What do you recommend for treatment of an ovarian cyst in a 49-year-old menopausal woman?
I have pain in my lower back associated with this cyst.
My mother had ovarian cancer.
Ovarian cysts are common during the reproductive years when women have menstrual cycles.
They are uncommon in menopause.
In fact, generally the ovaries are small, and in 30 percent of cases are not visualized by ultrasound.
While the majority of cysts, if found in the menopausal years, are benign (not cancerous), due to your family history, you need more follow-up and evaluation.
Characteristics of the cyst that your doctor will evaluate include size and whether the cyst has a complex or simple appearance.
Also, the doctor will determine if the cyst is growing rapidly.
What effects does birth control have on young women?
My daughter is 16 and has just started birth control to help with heavy and erratic periods.
She chose to have the depo shots.
How long is it safe for her to be on the shots or birth control in general?
It is great that your daughter is using an effective means to control her menstrual cycles.
Depo-Provera shots -- as well as oral contraceptive pills, patches, contraceptive vaginal rings and Implanon -- are safe and effective long-term solutions for menstrual control and pregnancy prevention.
I am 43 and prone to urinary tract infections.
What can I do decrease/stop getting them?
If you have had three or more urinary tract infections within 12 months, you should see an urogynecologist to exclude an anatomic cause of an infection.
In the meantime, try to void after intercourse.
For personal hygiene, wipe from front to back.
Unfortunately, research recently shows that cranberry juice is not effective for UTI's.
In closing, thank you for your interest and time.
Please exercise, eat healthy and -- despite a busy life -- please find time to smell the roses!
