Approximately one million Americans have Parkinson's disease.
More than 50,000 Americans are diagnosed with Parkinson's disease each year.
There is increasing evidence that Parkinson's disease may be inherited.
Men after the age of 60 are more likely to develop the disease than women.
The average age at the onset of symptoms is 60.
However, 10 percent of patients are diagnosed before age 40.
Greetings everybody.
Is Parkinson disease inherited?
The short answer is no.
The middle-sized answer is "not really."
My father had PD.
I don't recall how he was diagnosed, but it was very subtle at the time.
It progressed until he passed away from its complications 13 years later.
My question is - do I have to be concerned about a genetic predisposition to PD and what, if anything, can I do to help stave off the disease?
Also, what would one look for as 'early symptoms?'
Please see the previous answer above.
But to deal with a specific issue, the disease at this point is diagnosed clinically - there is no blood test.
There is a PET scan, but it is expensive and requires clinical suspicion in order to not be total waste of time.
In my family, my father's sister married my mother’s brother.
Each couple had two boys, now ages 58 to 68.
Two of us have PD.
Does this suggest something genetic?
My father, who lived to 95, had the shakes for years.
It does, a little.
On the other hand, it may just imply something about the environment, if you all live near each other.
In general, a situation involving cousins with PD does not generate a genetic evaluation.
I'm not sure what to say given that you are "double cousins."
Greetings – I am 85 years old and have been dealing with a movement disorder for the past 10 years.
About 6 yrs ago I was told I have Parkinson’s disease (PD).
Is there a skin patch to get vitamin D into the system?
Is there any test that will determine if the D supplement is working?
As far as I know, Vitamin D, which is useful for energy as well as bone health (important issues to PD patients) cannot be evaluated in terms of its function.
We can recheck the blood level to ensure that the supplements are getting into the system, but not whether they are "working."
I don't think that increasing the B12 level higher than what is generally recommended is that useful.
What I have picked up is that a "low-normal" level may not be sufficient for some people and, therefore, even though 300 (for example) is officially considered "normal," I recommend supplementation.
(Since the problem is probably not a stomach issue unless otherwise known, B12 pills are the first option.
Shots are unnecessary unless a stomach problem or a severe deficiency is found.)
Thanks for the response to my initial question.
As a follow up to your response, what is a 'good intake of vitamins D and E, and what am I looking for to 'not let my B12 drop'?
For vitamin E, use the diet on the Ohio State University website as a loose guide – do an internet search for "vitamin E Ohio.”
For vitamins D and B12, have your levels checked, and supplement as recommended by your general doctor.
Do you know when the rotigotine transdermal (Neupro®) patch will be available in the US?
I heard this summer (maybe July), but then again, I've been hearing similar rumors for the past 2 years!
Is there a patch to deliver dopamine?
Is it a more efficient manner rather than taking it in a form of a pill?
Are there any tests to see if it working?
See above - hopefully Neupro is coming back - this is a dopamine agonist (like Requip®) with fewer side effects since it is not oral.
How can one extend the "on time" of carbidopa/levodopa?
There are several ways I hear some of the drugs to treat Parkinson’s can have some scary side effects, like hallucinations.
Is that true?
Dopamine is one of the primary chemicals in the brain, and it is used in multiple areas.
Too much dopamine causes hallucinations and psychosis, while too little causes Parkinsonism.
Anti-schizophrenia medications cause Parkinsonian symptoms, while PD meds sometimes cause psychotic ones.
In general, though, at introductory doses, levodopa does not cause such effects.
The older the patient is, the more comorbid issues there are (such as dementia, a stroke, preexisting psychiatric disease); these factors and higher doses make one more likely to develop such things.
Do the benefits of the medications outweigh the risks?
See side effects, above.
I had a reaction to amantadine--skin discoloration.
Is this a circulation problem?
I cannot speak to that, sorry, but if you stop it for a while, watch the skin get better, and then restart it, and the skin gets worse again, there's your answer.
It's probably not a circulation problem but more of a drug rash, if it is related at all.
What are your thoughts/what have you done in your practice in response to the research that has shown levodopa's side effects of dyskinesias and motor complications?
It's still a work in progress.
As we have ideas, though not complete ones, as to where dyskinesias come from, it is hard to generate targeted drugs to stop them.
What is new in Parkinson’s research?
Do you recommend any web site for further information about PD research?
There are always trials going on.
Check in with the NIH website or with the Cleveland Clinic Center for Neurologic Restoration for specifics.
There are studies going on for drugs to minimize dyskinesias, to extend the duration of carbidopa-levidopa (Sinemet®) doses, and to stop hallucinations without causing Parkinsonian symptoms in reverse (which many hallucination medications typically do).
One study underway is for a pump of levodopa directly into the intestine - this has been used in Europe for a while.
This allows you to maintain a steady dose throughout the day (with the option of giving yourself a boost if necessary), while minimizing side effects, since the dose is carefully calculated.
There are studies observing early stage PD patients looking for "biomarkers"(i.e., chemicals in the blood that are affected by having PD), so that your doctor in the future can say "your parkinsonian level is high!" and that would be that.
I touched on some of that just now.
The most important thing to aim for now is "neuroprotection," which is protecting the remaining cells and slowing the progression of the disease.
There is controversial weak evidence that rasagiline (Azilect®) does this, and possibly so does a diet rich in vitamin E. Most important, of course, is exercise.
Anyway, the next generation of drugs hopefully will help minimize side effects such as dyskinesias, psychosis, hallucinations, and wearing off of medications.
Is COQ 10 useful in the treatment of PD?
This is also controversial.
CoQ10 has been found to be helpful in other areas, such as cardiac issues, so if you want to take it for that, go ahead.
In terms of PD, the studies were performed with high doses (1200 mg per day), which is kind of expensive.
There were studies with conflicting results.
Therefore, I do not recommend it for PD.
If someone wants to take it, I don't oppose it, as long as the patient realizes that the cost (actual money as well as any eating other additive put in since the FDA does not regulate herbal supplements) does not necessarily outweigh the possible benefit.
What can you tell us about Parkinson’s-related dementia treatment?
Of the three first level dementia drugs, rivastigmine (Exelon®) was actually studied in PD in the US and galantamine (Razadyne®) was studied in France.
But donepezil (Aricept®) is still the most commonly used agent because everyone knows about it.
In general, if tolerated, the patient should be on one of those three plus memantine (Namenda®).
Is there research suggesting what types of exercise--aerobic: walking vs elliptical vs bicycling, nonaerobic: core strengthening, balance, weight lifting--is most beneficial and in what quantities?
I tell my patients two things: stretching and aerobics.
How do I know if I am a candidate for deep brain stimulation?
Finally!
A DBS question!
Generally, we say that you need to have been diagnosed more than a couple of years ago, we need to be sure that the diagnosis IS Parkinson’s (and not a Park Plus syndrome), and you need to have responded to levodopa at some point (even if the effect is minimal today).
Reasons to push for surgery include intolerance of medications (side effects or dyskinesias); tremor specifically that doesn't respond to medications (stiffness must respond or we assume it's not PD); and requiring a very high dose or short frequency that life is based around taking the next Sinemet.
Is coffee good or bad for a PD patient?
What about spirits?
No big problem.
Moderation is OK.
Too much coffee, of course, makes the tremor worse, and too much alcohol makes the balance worse today and the tremor worse tomorrow.
Thanks for signing in today.
I appreciate your interest and confidence in me.
I hope this was helpful and informative.
Take care.
