Chronic abdominal pain may arise from many contributing factors.
Frequently the cause for the pain is known and treatments by a primary care, gastroenterology or surgical team may be directed toward treating the cause and, subsequently, the pain.
Sometimes, despite an extensive work-up by these teams, the cause of the pain may not be clear, but the pain may be debilitating just the same.
Patients with abdominal pain may then be referred to a pain management clinic for evaluation and treatment of their pain, whether from a known or unknown cause.
I've had constant low-intensity abdominal pain for 12 years, caused by irritable bowel syndrome or possibly endometriosis.
So far, I've been told to live with it, but it's waking me up at night, leaving me fatigued.
Is there any hope for pain management?I'm sorry to hear about this pain condition.
Irritable bowel syndrome is a painful and aggravating condition.
This may be quite amenable to treatment strategies advocated by our pain psychologist.
These include relaxation strategies, biofeedback and other treatment options.
Biofeedback is particularly interesting, and may be helpful for abdominal pain as well as chronic back pain or extremity pain.
Some patients find that this and other pain conditions are disabling.
Working with a pain psychologist or in an interdisciplinary rehabilitation program can sometimes be helpful, particularly for those patients who have become dependent upon opioid medications.
My 12-year-old daughter has had chronic abdominal pain for three years, and while her gastroenterologist has been able to assist with some of the pain, she is still uncomfortable.
Is she too young to be treated by a pain management doctor?I would recommend that she come in for an evaluation, given that her pain is very real for her.
We have specialists within our pain management department for the various specialties in our field, including pediatric pain management as well as other fields of pain management, such as back pain, complex regional pain syndrome and cancer-related pain to name a few.
I am 31 years old and have had three children.
Not long after my last delivery, I started having severe abdominal pains as well as painful intercourse.
My doctors have done laparoscopies, an MRI and an ultrasound and found nothing.
Endometriosis has been ruled out.
I have been trying Lupron Depot®.
If this last shot doesn’t help or work, my doctor says the next best thing may be a hysterectomy.
That scares me and seems kind of drastic without a definitive diagnosis.
What are your thoughts?Prior to considering a hysterectomy, I would recommend scheduling an office visit for evaluation in a pain management clinic.
These symptoms may be indicative of visceral pain that may possibly be treated more conservatively, with a diagnostic and then a potentially therapeutic nerve block.
I have had minor and major small bowel obstructions (SBOs) since megasurgery last year that are unresolved.
The test only shows distension of the small intestine, no kinks, twists, adhesions or tumors.
How do I cope with the strong cramps and abdominal pain that accompany mild SBOs?Symptoms such as cramps may be indicative of a small bowel obstruction.
This is good to know in case the obstruction worsens, in which case you should have close observation with your primary team.
If the symptoms persist despite no evidence of obstruction, you could consider a muscle relaxant medication possibly, though these are not without possible side effects such as sedation.
It is important to identify the cause of symptoms, such as cramping, prior to treatment with medications that may lessen the effect of the symptoms, such as cramping.
In your case, you have identified that this may be related to a small bowel obstruction that you seem to have investigated quite thoroughly.
What are the treatment options for abdominal pain when you can't find a cause?Dr__Vrooman:Abdominal pain is usually from one of three sources: somatosensory, visceral or central.
Somatosensory usually involves the abdominal wall and the nerves that course through the muscles of the abdominal wall.
Visceral pain involves the abdominal organs themselves.
Central pain may result from chronic pain that has existed for a long period of time and may, in a sense, result from the ‘plasticity’ of the abdominal nervous system.
Frequently a cause is identified for abdominal pain, and treatment may range from medication to injections or to surgery.
When the cause is not known, as is also quite often the case, we try to identify if the pain is from one of the three main causes above.
We may perform a diagnostic test to help identify the cause.
Treatment may help improve pain management and functionality, as these are our main goals.Treatment may involve physical therapy, injections performed under ultrasound or fluoroscopy in our pain clinic, and to more advanced treatments.
What do you do with undiagnosed abdominal pain?
The doctors have done every test and can not find anything.
When do you as a physician give up and just try and treat the pain (so far little has helped on that front either!) and no longer look for a cause?Clearly, this is a common question, as it is very similar to the last one and one that patients often pose in the clinic.
It is important to work with a primary care physician and a gastroenterologist first to help identify a cause.
We first look for a cause as well, but can frequently identify a nerve that is involved by performing a nerve block early in our diagnosis and treatment paradigm.
A specific nerve block, such as an ilioinguinal nerve block, genitofemoral nerve block or a transversus abdominis plane blockade may be helpful in diagnosis and potential therapy.
If the pain seems visceral in nature by the history and examination, a block such as a celiac plexus block may be helpful if more conservative approaches have not been effective.
I have severe stomach pains that also can go around to my back, and down to my groin.
The physician’s test came out negative.
It was suggested that it was constipation.
I have taken laxatives, but it has not helped.
Could this still be constipation, or should I keep looking for another answer?It is difficult to diagnose your pain based on your description alone.
I would recommend an evaluation with a pain physician for your specific concern.
However, given that the pain has not resolved with laxatives, there could be other causes for your pain.
The pain could be due to nerve irritation in your back that is causing pain to travel toward your abdomen and your groin.
This merits further investigation if the pain has been this debilitating.
What are some of the possible causes of abdominal pain?Some common causes are conditions such as thoracic disc displacement as well as neuralgias from intercostal, iliohypogastric, ilioinguinal and genitofemoral neuralgias.
There are numerous conditions contributing to visceral pain, including gastritis, chronic pancreatitis, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, appendicitis, cholecystitis and malignancies as well, to name a few conditions.
Sometimes patients have chronic pain after multiple surgeries in the past.
Clearly, work-up with your primary care physician or gastroenterologist should precede a visit to a pain physician.
When they say the pain is all in your head, how can this be?
Why and how would a psychological issue manifest itself as pain in the abdomen?Pain is real.
No question about it.
There may be conservative measures that can help, including cognitive behavioral therapy or biofeedback as an adjunct to nerve blocks if pain has contributed to depression, anxiety or disability.
Frequently, one nerve block alone may not cure a chronic pain condition, but may be helpful in combination with counseling, only if indicated.
To make an appointment withBruce Vrooman, MD, or any other specialist in our Department of Pain Management at Cleveland Clinic, please call 216.444.PAIN. You can also visit us online atwww.clevelandclinic.org/painmanagement
