If you struggle with diabetes and are overweight, you are not alone.
More than half of Americans are overweight and roughly 12 million have severe obesity.
Obesity is one of the most important factors for the development of type 2 diabetes.
Recent studies have shown that bariatric surgery (also known as gastric bypass or weight-loss surgery) is not only an effective tool for treating obesity, but also for preventing, treating and even resolving diabetes in some cases.
How likely is it that bariatric surgery will help cure my type 2 diabetes? 
Very likely.
About 80 percent of patients have their diabetes resolved, but the likelihood of that depends on how long did you have diabetes and if you are using insulin.
If I have type 2 diabetes, should I prepare for bariatric surgery differently?You may need some adjustment of your diabetes medications prior to surgery.
Also, if you are on a liquid diet prior to surgery to prevent low sugars.
Will my diabetes go away permanently, or is this fix only temporary?
Your diabetes will definitely improve, but it’s not certain if your diabetes will be cured.
How can I find out if I am a candidate for bariatric surgery if I have type 2 diabetes?Know what your body mass index is and check with your insurance carrier.
What are the main symptoms of type 2 diabetes?Many times no symptoms are present, but in cases of severe hyperglycemia, there may be fatigue, polyurea and thirst.
I saw the term diabetes type 1.5.
What does this mean?
That means there is some resistance, but the primary defect is that the pancreas won't make insulin.
I read about a study showing that poor glucose management with diabetes is linked to reduced mental functions in older people.
Can you please elaborate?
Is this a serious issue?High blood sugars and diabetes are linked to a decline in cognitive function.
Other factors like blood pressure and obesity also play a role in this process What is hemoglobin A1c, and why should I care about it?
It is a marker of the average blood sugar in the body for the last three months.
What types of things makes a person more likely to develop type 2 diabetes?
A family history of diabetes, being overweight, sedentary lifestyle, smoking, and a high fat/sugar diet.
If I am considered overweight or obese, is it inevitable that I will develop diabetes?
Not always—being overweight is a big risk factor that increases the risk of diabetes and is an acquired risk factor, but family history and genetics are equally as important.
I heard about a new study showing that psoriasis is an independent risk factor for diabetes.
I don’t get the correlation.
Can you please explain?
How serious is it of a risk?
That is correct that there is an association, but the etiology is not known.
Prevention with healthy diet and exercise are the key to preventing diabetes in high risk people.
I was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus less than one year ago, does that improve the likelihood?Early onset of type 2 diabetes is very treatable with diet, exercise and sometimes oral agents like metformin.
I read that type 1 or type 2 diabetics can start to develop the other form, thereby, causing the patient to have both type I and type 2 diabetes together.
I did not know this was possible and I don't quite understand it.
How dangerous is this and how is it treated (any differently)?
Both types of diabetes are linked to inadequate insulin production.
Weight gain can complicate both types of diabetes and make it harder to control.
How does losing weight alone control/prevent/treat diabetes?
Weight loss improves insulin sensitivity and can make your pancreas work again.
Bariatric surgery also improves gut hormones that make your pancreas work to make insulin again.
These hormones are also the key to why bariatric surgery improves diabetes.
If I have diabetes, can I still go on a diet?
Yes, but you need to have your medication adjusted to prevent low sugars.
It depends on your medicines.
If I have diabetes, which way is the healthiest to lose weight—surgery or dieting?The safest is diet, but is not as effective as surgery.
Surgery is riskier and should be done in a high volume center by experienced surgeons.
Sugar substitutes give me headaches.
What can I use instead?
That can happen.
Avoid sugar substitutes if this occurs.
Why is dextrose or glucose recommended over the readily available sucrose (table sugar) for treating a hypoglycemic situation?Both work to bring up the sugar.
We recommend candy or some juice.
Any advances in noninvasive CGMs (continuous glucose monitors)?The technology is improving and can help those who are unaware of hypoglycemia in type 1 diabetics.
Why does the bypass stomach have to be made so small?
It is for better weight loss, also for decreasing ulcer formation and reflux.
Do you have to be obese to get surgery?
Currently, most insurance carriers cover bariatric surgery in patients with BMI greater than 35, so, yes, you need to be obese.
What are the criteria that make someone a candidate for bariatric surgery?
BMI greater than 35 plus major comorbidities, like diabetes, hypertension, heart problems; or BMI greater than 40 without major comorbidities.
Regarding your answer to my previous question, is candidacy for surgery is based solely on BMI (body mass index)?
In addition to BMI, you should have major comorbidities related to obesity, like diabetes, hypertension, heart problems, etc.
For patient with a BMI greater than 40, no major comorbidities are needed to have their surgery covered.
What is the recovery time after surgery?
Most patients spend two to three days in the hospital, and then need about two to three weeks afterward to fully recover and return to work.
How soon can I expect to start losing weight after I receive surgery?
Weight loss starts immediately after surgery, and typically continues up to two years after.
Is bloating common with eating after the surgery?
After some procedures, it happens.
Please work with your nutritionist to avoid certain foods causing bloating.
What about the recent Lap-Band® controversy?
How would a patient rule out an unfit facility or doctor?
Resent research showed some poorer results of long-term weight loss after Lap-Band®.
The best way to verify doctor's qualifications is to contact the American Society for Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery (ASMBS).
What kinds of results should I expect from bariatric surgery?
Depending on which procedure you choose, the weight loss is about 100 lbs within one year.
Most of the obesity-related health problems should resolve, including diabetes and hypertension.
How long after bariatric surgery will I start seeing improvements in my diabetes?Within days to weeks, typically.
Your caloric intake is reduced and weight loss will occur at the same time that good gut hormones are released, helping your pancreas to make insulin again.
I have GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease).
How does this surgery affect this?
Most patients improve their GERD symptoms significantly after surgery, especially after gastric bypass.
What are the lifestyle changes necessary post-procedure?
Will your doctor discuss these in-depth and help plan with you?
Yes, you need to follow our recommendation regarding your diet, exercise and vitamins and supplements.
We offer very extensive preoperative and postoperative consultations with nutritionists and a psychologist, who provide good support to the patient.
Are you still on a ‘diabetic’ diet, even after the surgery?Yes.
Your diabetes will be diet controlled after surgery.
You should still be checked periodically for diabetes complications and progression even after bariatric surgery.
What are the ‘rules’ on alcohol after surgery?
Even a small amount of alcohol may have harmful effects.
Please avoid alcohol.
It is very rapidly absorbed to the intestine, and ‘works’ much faster then before surgery.
Are you still on insulin after the surgery?
Sometimes yes, but it will be weaned off if you don't need it.
Are there limitations to taking certain medications after surgery?
Yes.
Certain drugs are absorbed differently by the body after surgery because your gut is altered What about the risk of developing an alcohol addiction post-procedure?
Have you seen this in any of your patients?
A person is more prone to the effects of alcohol after stomach reduction surgery.
We recommend limiting alcohol intake after surgery.
Do you recommend any psychological counseling post-procedure?
Yes.
Some people need psychological counseling for behavior modification regarding diet, alcohol use, mood control, etc.
Are there studies about health and eating issues five to 10 to 15 years after gastric bypass, especially if partial or more weight has been regained?
That depends on what procedure you had.
Some procedures used in the past resulted in some weight regain.
To maintain good results, you should follow recommendations for good eating habits and exercise.
What happens to a person who starts regaining weight after the surgery?
Are there complications associated with this?
Please see your surgeon to evaluate this.
In most cases, it is due to poor eating habits and lack of exercise.
In some cases, it may be caused by some stretching out of the pouch.
What are the mortality statistics for bariatric surgery procedures?
Mortality from bariatric surgery is very close to zero.
Very few patients experience major complications.
Mortality mainly depends on type of surgery.
For example, for gastric bypass surgery it is about 0.2 percent What are the inherent risks, if any, of bariatric surgery?
It all depends on the type of surgery.
For example, a major risk of gastric bypass is intestinal leak which leads to internal infections.
The major risk of gastric banding is gastric reflux and slippage of the stomach.
In general, the overall risk of bariatric surgery is about 5 percent for major complications.
All of the literature claims that slow weight loss is best, both for long term success and health.
How can such rapid weight loss as seen with this surgery be healthy?
Rapid weight loss results in fat and lean muscle loss.
When it occurs in the presence of exercise and adequate protein intake to maintain muscle mass, is not necessarily harmful.
What types of complications might occur after I receive bariatric surgery?
That depends on what type of surgery you choose.
Gastric bypass has more risks, but, even still, less then 5 percent patients may develop major complications.
The most severe complication —intestinal leak —occurs in less than 2 percent of patients.
I have type 2 diabetes.
Will insurance cover the cost of having bariatric surgery?Your insurance should review that request.
In general, if the BMI (body mass index) is greater than 35 and if there are major comorbidities, including diabetes, it is covered.
If you can get your insurance to pay for this surgery, do they also cover other surgeries after the weight loss?
Such as those dealing with excess baggy skin?
Not always, as this is considered cosmetic by some insurance companies.
A friend of mine had the surgery and had to lose weight prior to the surgery.
This was very hard for her.
Why did she have to do this?To make sure that she can stick to a diet program.
Weight loss prior to surgery can reduce liver fat, so that the operation is technically easier to perform.
Can you talk about the new drug, Belviq™, approved by the FDA recently?
How does it work?
Do you know where it is being prescribed?
Please set up an appointment with our bariatric medicine specialists to have this medication prescribed.
We have limited experience with this particular medication.
Overall, very few medications are proven to be effective.
What potential do minimally invasive treatment options, such as the GI Dynamics EndoBarrier® device, have on the resolution of type 2 diabetes and obesity?
And how long will these devices need to reside in the body to attain clinically useful results?
We are currently investigating these new devices.
FDA has not approved them yet for clinical use.
There are preliminary data from overseas showing quite good results, but it is too early to say that it will work long term.
Please stay in touch with Cleveland Clinic’s Bariatric & Metabolic Institute for updates.
