Inflammation isn’t inherently bad.
In fact, we couldn’t survive without it.
Normal inflammation is the body’s response to any injury or infection.
It’s part of our body’s natural healing process.
I had heard something about this recently—how certain foods are curing Alzheimer’s and dementia patients.
They (researchers) believe, or at least partially believe, that memory problems are caused by inflammation of the brain.
Certain kinds of foods are proven to reduce inflammation in the body.
I was curious to see which foods do this and how much you would have to consume to get the benefits.
Yes, there is research on this that is ongoing and potentially very exciting!
There may be a link with inflammation and the buildup of amyloid plaque on the brain that increases the risk of Alzheimer’s disease.
Diet may be a great way to help combat this.
What to eat?
Plenty of fresh fruits and vegetables, 100% whole grains, extra virgin olive oil, nuts, and lean protein.
As for the amount, I would say that eating two handfuls of fruits per day and three handfuls of vegetables is a great start.
In addition, 1 to 2 tablespoons of extra virgin olive oil and two 3 ounce servings of fish, such as salmon, per week, would be wonderful.
Good luck!
In regards to your answer to the question about Alzheimer’s disease, can these foods also help prevent it?
I'm not sure if anyone knows the answer to this question yet, but some exciting research is being done in this area.
What we do know is that consuming anti-inflammatory foods can reduce the inflammation in the brain that is associated with Alzheimer’s disease.
I always tell my clients to "set themselves up for success" by eating a healthy diet.
It can only help.
Is the anti-inflammation issue even more important after cancer has been diagnosed?
A number of research studies have looked at the role of nutrition and cancer, and an anti-inflammatory diet that is high in antioxidants and dietary fiber can be very beneficial before or after a diagnosis.
A registered dietitian with an expertise in treating cancer can help you make the best decision on how to incorporate these foods into your individual program.
What diseases and conditions are anti-inflammatory foods known to help with?
There are a number of conditions that are involved with inflammation.
Some of these include cardiovascular disease, hypertension, cancer, arthritis, and other conditions, such as fibromyalgia and lupus.
An anti-inflammatory diet can really make a positive impact on many of these conditions.
So, if you need another reason to eat your fruits and vegetables, 100% whole grains, extra virgin olive oil, healthy fats, lean protein, and low-fat dairy, this is it!
I have had open heart surgery grafts and a valve replaced.
In the last 4 years, I have also received 7 stents.
I would appreciate any information to stop this from progressing so fast.
I am thin and exercise.
From a nutrition standpoint, I would suggest consuming fresh fruits and vegetables, 100% whole grains, healthy fats—such as extra virgin olive oil (cold pressed), lean protein sources, and low-fat dairy as part of your treatment program.
These foods will help reduce inflammation in the body, and help to promote healing.
But this is not meant to replace your medical treatment program with your physician.
Good luck!
Can positive ANA (antinuclear antibody) and titer results be improved by eating anti-inflammatory foods?
If so, what foods are best?
Thanks for the question.
A positive ANA test may mean that you have a higher incidence of an autoimmune disorder, but not necessarily.
I would suggest following up with your doctor or rheumatologist on this one.
That being said, a diet high in fruits, vegetables, 100% whole grains, and healthy fats can only improve your health, so I would suggest trying an anti-inflammatory diet if you have not done so already.
Are there any tests which can be done to determine a person's level of inflammation, and then to monitor the effectiveness of dietary changes?
Yes, there are blood levels such as CRP (C - reactive protein) that can look at inflammation levels.
That being said, there can be many things that are causing a high or low inflammation level, such as infection, illness, etc.
I have my hs-CRP (high-sensitivity CRP) checked annually.
When I went on a statin, it went to zero, but does that mean the inflammation is just being masked?
Even on a low-fat, vegan diet I had some elevation of my test results—I think it was one.
I believe that’s moderate risk.
When I went on Crestor®, it went to zero.
Is something in my diet causing the mild inflammation, and is the Crestor® masking it?
Statin medications may be reducing inflammation as well as the oxidation of LDL (low-density lipoprotein), the bad cholesterol.
I would suggest that you stay in contact with your physician about your medication plan, but keep eating a diet high in fresh fruits and vegetables, 100% whole grains, extra virgin olive oil, healthy fats, lean protein, and low-fat dairy.
Your anti-inflammatory nutrition program combined with your medical treatment program is your best way to manage your health.
How are uric acid and CRP related?
Are they the same?
Uric acid and CRP are two different types of markers of inflammation.
Do Certain Foods Worsen Inflammation?
I have found that any foods that contain any form of corn increases my pain level.
Is it because corn in general does that, or is it because the American corn product has been modified?
And if it's because of the modification, would all foods that have been modified be harmful or even toxic to the body?
It's difficult to say why the corn is causing you pain.
Have you seen a physician about this?
There may be a medical reason that this is occurring, but it truly goes beyond my scope of practice to answer this question.
Corn is high in antioxidants called carotenes, such as lutein and zeaxanthin.
If you are looking for an alternate way to get these into your diet, I would suggest consuming foods such as eggs, kale, spinach, turnip greens, collard greens, romaine lettuce, broccoli, zucchini, corn, and Brussels sprouts.
To get the most nutritional bang for your buck, I would suggest eating them raw or steamed lightly.
Vegan friends of mine keep warning me about eating the "nightshade" vegetables because they are supposed to cause inflammation and arthritis.
Would this be the case with, say, potatoes?
Nightshade foods, such as potatoes, tomatoes, and eggplant, have been theorized for many years to increase inflammation in the body and increase pain in arthritis.
Unfortunately, there is little research to support these claims.
A white potato is considered a nightshade food.
While I do not believe these foods increase inflammation, you might want to consider a sweet potato instead (high in beta carotene and a healthier option).
Nightshade foods are foods that claim to increase inflammation and pain for those suffering from arthritis.
However, there is limited clinical research to support that nightshade foods have any impact on arthritis.
My suggestion is to consume a diet high in fruits, vegetables, and 100% whole grains, such as 100% whole grain bread, brown rice, whole grain pastas, and cereals.
These will help reduce inflammation in the body.
Which foods should be avoided?
There are foods that increase inflammation in the body, and we can see this on an ultrasound, which is quite amazing!
Foods that increase inflammation include saturated fats, trans fats, and added sugars.
Added sugars are any foods that do not include naturally occurring sugars, such as fresh fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy products.
Foods that have added sugars include cookies, cakes, pies, and other pastries.
In addition, other foods with added sugars include cereal bars and pasta sauces.
What nutritional criteria should foods have to help fight inflammation?
All Go!
Foods® meet these nutritional criteria Can fish oil be effective in fighting inflammation?
How much fish oil per day would be effective?
There is good research to show that fish oils found in salmon, sardines, and tuna can reduce inflammation.
My first recommendation would be to consume fatty fish at least two to three times per week.
A number of research studies have found that 1,000 mg of fish oil (a combination of DHA and EPA) would be very beneficial for reducing inflammation.
Is Ensure® is a problem or a solution?
I'm not 100% clear on your question.
Ensure® is a supplement that can be used if inadequate intake is occurring.
If you are unable to consume a healthy diet for a number of reasons, it may be appropriate to supplement with a beverage such as Ensure®, but a healthy diet comes first.
Do you find that the Gerson Institute has valuable guidelines for the body to self-heal, since it is a food-based protocol?
I think that nutrition can make a significant impact on many conditions, and any program that recommends sound nutrition principles can help improve health.
If we stick to foods that are close to nature or natural and avoid processed foods, won't we be o.k. and avoid inflammation in the body?
I try to shop the perimeter of the grocery store.
Yes, foods that are normally on the perimeter are more fresh foods and produce and less processed foods.
These tend to reduce inflammation in the body.
Keep up the good work!
Virgin coconut oil is another option when you are choosing oils.
Coconut oil is much higher in saturated fat than extra virgin olive oil, but, in moderation, can be part of a healthy diet.
Research on coconut water has been very positive as an alternative hydration source as well as an option for replacing electrolytes, so that may be worth considering as well.
Are fish and seafood inflammatory?
Salmon seems to be a good choice, but what about squid and shrimp?
The only meat I eat is seafood.
Salmon is high in omega 3 fatty acids, and has been shown to help reduce inflammation in the body and would be my first choice, along with tuna and sardines for the omega 3 content.
I cut up ginger root and put it in my drinking water and tea for inflammation I feel better by doing this every day.
What do you think?
Sounds great to me!
There has been some great preliminary research on the anti-inflammatory benefits of ginger and health.
Have a cup of tea for me!
I love raw nuts, but even a very small amount causes weight gain.
Does that mean they are causing inflammation due to the weight gain when eating them?
Nuts are a great source of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids, but you are correct.
Portion control is key here.
I would suggest continuing to eat nuts, but keep your portion to a small handful to prevent weight gain.
What do you suggest to use as a sweetener to use for adults and especially children?
What are your comments about the use of Splenda®?
If you are only using a small amount of sweetener, I would suggest agave nectar.
It is also considered an added sugar, but leads to a lower glycemic response and is much sweeter than sugar.
Do spices help reduce the inflammation in your body?
Yes, spices are a great addition to your nutrition program.
A number of spices have anti-inflammatory benefits, such as turmeric, cumin, cinnamon, ginger, and coriander.
If you are looking for a number of fabulous recipes that include herbs and spices, consider my GO!
Foods® for You program.
There are over 80 healthy recipes that all meet the Cleveland Clinic healthy Go!
Foods® guidelines.
Since the food industry can claim "zero trans-fats" on nutrition labels even if the product contains amounts under a specified threshold, how are we to determine whether food items do in fact contain trans-fats?
Great question!
Yes, a food can be labeled trans-fat free if it has less than 0.5 grams of trans fat per serving.
To determine if a product contains trans fat, look at the ingredient label.
If it says “partially hydrogenated” in the ingredients, put it down.
Lately, I have been hearing more about gluten-free foods.
Isn't that the same as eating a diet of vegetables, fruits, extra-virgin olive oil, and 100% whole grain?
Gluten-free products are very popular right now.
People who are consuming a gluten-free diet avoid any type of grains that have wheat, rice, oats, or barley.
So, consuming fruits, vegetables, lean protein, low-fat dairy, and gluten-free grain products would be appropriate.
For people who cannot digest gluten, it is very important that they follow a gluten-free diet to stay healthy.
If they eat foods that contain gluten, or wheat protein, they can have absorption concerns and many gastrointestinal issues.
There are a number of gluten-free products to choose from today that are very tasty.
Is coffee good for you?
Coffee can be good for you, but let's talk about how it is prepared.
Black coffee, without cream and sugar, has been shown to help increase alertness, and may have a positive relationship to heart disease, Alzheimer’s disease, and cancer.
Are there additional benefits from yogurt beyond the ingredient of low-fat dairy products?
Yes, yogurt can provide additional nutrients, such as calcium and protein.
Some interesting research has come out on the role of calcium and the prevention of stroke.
It appears that foods high in calcium, such as yogurt, reduce clumping, or platelet aggregation, in the blood, that leads to strokes.
More research is needed, but preliminary research is very promising.
I have observed that low-fat salad dressings are disappearing from grocery store shelves.
What can the American Dietetics Association (ADA) do to reduce this trend, and can they influence nutrition teaching programs in schools?
I agree that there are many opportunities for registered dietitians to be involved with the schools.
I have colleagues at Cleveland Clinic who are working with the schools in the Cleveland area to revamp their menus, which is very positive.
Change in the schools is happening, just not as quickly as we all would like.
What I can suggest is to be a great role model for your children.
Research shows that mothers have the most significant impact on the nutritional choices of their children.
This is a great time to take your kids to the farmer's market, go berry picking, and teach them where their food comes from.
Do you recommend eliminating table sugar from your diet or consuming it in moderation?
Is brown sugar healthier than white sugar?
I would suggest limiting it as much as possible, because we know that added sugars increase inflammatory biomarkers such as c-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin, and cytokine levels.
Brown sugar is not healthier than white sugar.
I would suggest trying a small amount of agave nectar instead.
It is sweeter than sugar and causes less blood sugar elevation.
Do you feel avoiding all red meat is necessary to minimize inflammation?
I would suggest reducing red meat consumption quite a bit due to its inflammation response, but can be enjoyed occasionally.
What I also tell my clients is to make sure that your portion sizes are moderate as well.
A serving size of protein is about 3 to 4 ounces, or about the size of a woman's palm of her hand.
What is the best food for overall wellness?
Wellness means different things to different people.
The web sitewww.ClevelandClinicWellness.comhas lots of great information on wellness that can help you live a healthy life.
A few suggestions that I have would be to sign up for our wellness tip of the day atwww.wellnesstips.com, and identify a few areas of your life to work on.
For example, we talk about the "Big 5" areas to focus on for wellness.
These include Can you tell us more about GO!
Foods® for You and principles of the ancient Mediterranean diet?
Yes!
The GO!
Foods® for You program is an 8-week, online nutrition program based on the Mediterranean diet that I created to help people live a healthier life.
It has an individualized eating assessment, healthy activities to help you eat better, and a pantry swap to make sure you have the healthy stuff in your house.
I've also created over 80 healthy recipes that all meet the Cleveland Clinic Go!
Foods® criteria that are good for you and taste fabulous!
We are offering a discounted price if you would like to try it at home!
I hope you enjoy it as much as I enjoyed writing it.
Could you suggest additional programs and resources?
