Pulmonary hypertension is a rare and serious lung disorder.
It occurs in people of all ages, races and ethnic backgrounds.
This condition is much more common in young adults, and is approximately twice as common in women as in men.
One of the more severe causes of pulmonary hypertension is due to unresolved blood clots in the lungs, which is called chronic pulmonary thromboembolic disease (CTEPH).
Although CTEPH can cause serious illness and can even be fatal in certain cases, it can be cured in some patients through a surgical procedure that removes the obstruction in the lung.
Other causes of pulmonary hypertension may require a lung transplant to treat the patient.
Cleveland Clinic's Sydell and Arnold Miller Family Heart & Vascular Institute is one of the largest cardiovascular and thoracic specialty groups in the world, providing patients with expert medical management and a full range of therapies.
Our areas of expertise combine research, education and clinical practice to provide innovative and scientifically based treatments for cardiac, vascular, esophageal and thoracic disease in 24 departments and centers.
The commitment of our physicians and scientists to the prevention and cure of cardiovascular disease has led to innovative care, better outcomes and improved quality of life for patients.U.S. News & World Reporthas ranked Cleveland Clinic as the No.1 heart program in America every year since 1995.
MyChart®: Your Personal Health Connection, is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org How does diastolic dysfunction cause pulmonary hypertension?
How do you test for diastolic dysfunction?The most common way to diagnose diastolic dysfunction is with an echocardiogram.
We often think of diastolic dysfunction as the heart being unable to relax or that it is stiff.
By being stiff, when the heart fills with blood, the pressure inside the heart rises and this is what causes pulmonary hypertension.
My pulmonologist thinks I have diastolic dysfunction that is causing my pulmonary hypertension, but my cardiologist doesn't agree.
He thinks it is my autoimmune disease.
I have another echocardiogram scheduled in November.
Should that give me the answer then?An echocardiogram can give some clues, but you really need a heart catheterization to distinguish different types of pulmonary hypertension.
I am 53-year-old male with hypertension and on medications for that.
Lately I've had the following symptoms while doing light yard work.
I get winded and dizzy, so I have to stop and take a break.
When I measure my blood pressure when I immediately come in the house, it is 108/63 with a pulse of 120.
I experience heavy breathing and coughing for 24 hours.
I measured my blood pressure five minutes after working outside and had a blood pressure of 100/58 with a pulse of 136.
Ten minutes after working, I measured my blood pressure at 100/64 with a pulse of 118.
Twenty five minutes after working outside, I had a blood pressure of 100/65 with a pulse of 112.
Forty minutes after working outside, I had a blood pressure of 110/69 with a pulse of 102 - are these symptoms of pulmonary hypertensionNot necessarily.
Shortness of breath, dizziness and fast pulse rate can be seen with many other medical conditions.
Pulmonary hypertension is one of them, but it would not be the most common.
Checking for common things first like asthma and heart failure is best, but then move on to an echogram quickly if nothing is evident after the first evaluation.
Is the echocardiogram considered a stress test?It can be.
A stress echocardiogram would be a good idea to rule out coronary blockages that may need a coronary angiogram to confirm.
That echo also would be a good screen for PH, which would need a right heart catheterization to be confirmed.
Can anyone with lung disease ever be classified as Type 1 PH?If the lung disease is severe, no.
But if the lung disease is mild and the pulmonary hypertension is very severe, you can view that as Type 1 PH.
What is the difference between primary and secondary pulmonary hypertension?Secondary means that we are able to identify a reason for the pulmonary hypertension, e.g., pulmonary fibrosis, blood clots, etc.
Primary means we are not able to find a reason for the pulmonary hypertension.
This is referred to as idiopathic nowadays.
How can I know if my pulmonary hypertension is linked to blood clots?Based on symptoms and your history alone, it is not possible.
At Cleveland Clinic we always screen for PH due to blood clots (chronic pulmonary thromboembolic disease, or CTEPH) with a VQ (ventilation/perfusion pulmonary) scan.
We evaluate patients with CT scans, MRI and pulmonary angiography.
These tests are needed to make a diagnosis of CTEPH and to assess patients prior to the operation.
My husband has a healthy lifestyle and a good weight.
He is a non-smoker.
However, friends are recommending we switch to a vegan (preferably raw food), low oil diet.
Is there any medical verification that this change could be beneficial?Not to my knowledge.
I never smoked.In that case, the diagnosis of DIP is suspect.
Did they tell you desquamative interstitial pneumonia, or did you mean something else?
Cleveland Clinic told me based on video-assisted thoracoscopy.That is unusual, but certainly possible.
Same comments about pulmonary hypertension though.
If a patient is on intravenous medications for pulmonary hypertension, will he always have side effects and to what extent?Not always.
Side effects are highly variable, and some patients have a lot, while some don't.
Now most people on intravenous medications will have some side effects, but doses are usually adjusted to find the right balance between benefit and side effects.
What can a person do the make pulmonary hypertension better?The best thing to do is to follow with a pulmonary hypertension specialist.
Otherwise, eating a healthy diet, not smoking, losing weight and light exercise (if allowed by your pulmonary hypertension expert) are always a good idea.
How can you prolong your life with pulmonary hypertension?Current pulmonary hypertension medications can prolong life.
Following up with a pulmonary hypertension expert is the best thing you can do.
Two cardiologists have told me that if the valve leakage is fixed, it is possible that the pulmonary hypertension will go away or at least subside.
I thought pulmonary hypertension was permanent, that's why I'm most concerned about rapid surgical intervention.
Could fixing the leakage stop or even reverse the pulmonary hypertension?The vast majority of patients with pulmonary hypertension from leaky valves will see dramatic reversals in the pulmonary hypertension when the leak is stopped.
If the valves have been leaking for many years, there is the possibility that pulmonary hypertension will not completely normalize.
