The multidisciplinary Neurological Institute at Cleveland Clinic is a leader in treating and researching the most complex neurological disorders, advancing innovations such as epilepsy surgery, stereotactic spine radiosurgery, interstitial thermal therapy for brain tumors and deep brain stimulation.
Annually, our staff of more than 300 specialists oversees nearly 175,000 outpatient visits and performs more than 9,500 surgical/interventional procedures.
MyChart®: Your Personal Health Connection, is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org Are atonic seizures considered partial seizures?Atonic seizures could be partial seizures, but sometimes they could be part of what we call generalized epilepsy.
A determination of the cause and type of epilepsy causing your atonic seizures requires a video EEG (electroencephalogram) evaluation in the Epilepsy Monitoring Unit.
This is important because, if these seizures have failed control with medications and they were shown to be partial, there may be a possibility of epilepsy surgery that may result in seizure control.
What are the primary symptoms and seizure types seen from the left temporal side of the brain?Symptoms include rising abdominal sensations (the ‘so-called’ abdominal auras) smell sensations, sensation of fear, feeling of déjà vu and other associated symptoms.
I have been an epileptic patient for two years and have recently shifted from Lamictal® 100 mg and Depakine® 1000 mg daily to Topamax® 100mg and Depakine®  1000 mg daily.
Is the dose that I currently take of Depakine®  Chrono 1000 mg and Topamax® 100 mg safe?As long as you do not have any side effects from taking the two medications, the doses you are taking are not supposed to lead to any problems.
As a matter of fact, many of our patients do take much higher doses of both medications, but you have to keep in mind that each patient tolerates a certain dose of a particular medication.
What are the long-term effects of anti-seizure medications when a patient is uncontrolled and does not qualify for surgery?Long-term effects can be related to memory loss, loss of concentration, difficulty walking, and so on.
A follow-up with an epileptologist is needed to ensure good levels of medication while avoiding the side effects.
Is a is a combination of Topamax® 100 mg and Depakine® Chrono 1000 mg daily a good dose for epilepsy?Yes.
If seizures recur on these doses, both medication doses could be increased.
Are there specific types of seizures that have a better outcome from surgery?Yes, surgery is better for focal epilepsy and seizures that don't involve eloquent areas of the brain, i.e., areas with important functions for everyday life such as speech, motor control and vision.
What areas of the brain do not qualify for neurosurgery?In general, areas with high function like the brain stem, basal ganglia, and speech and motor areas are generally not candidates for neurosurgery.
With a frequency of two seizures in one year, would surgery be a consideration, or do you recommend staying the course on oral medication, increasing dosage or adding another medication?It depends on how the seizures are affecting your quality of life.
In some patients, this can be an indication for further treatment.
How do I know if I am a candidate for epilepsy surgery?In order for you to be a candidate for epilepsy surgery, you need to have focal epilepsy—meaning the seizures are coming from a single area in the brain.
You also need to be medically refractory.
This means you should have tried at least two different types of epilepsy medications without significant results—meaning they were unable to control your seizures.
Once you meet these criteria, surgery may be an option.
Can surgery cure my epilepsy?It depends what type of epilepsy you have.
In general, surgery has the opportunity to completely stop the seizures, but it all depends on what type of seizures you are experiencing.
I am presently working.
After a period of four years with no seizures, I have had several seizures in the last year.
I feel I need to explore the possibility of surgery.
How much time away from work would I need to plan to have an initial evaluation to find out if I am a candidate for surgery?The evaluation would require 10 to 15 days.
This obviously depends on the tests that we would need to do.
I suggest that you call our Cleveland Clinic Epilepsy Access Coordinator Lauri Stegman at 216.445.0601.
What is your success rate with surgery for temporal lobe seizures, as well as the nature of complications and likelihood of an undesirable outcome from surgery?The resulting seizure control from surgery varies from 60 percent to 70 percent.
Complications related to surgery in the temporal lobe are two to three percent.
Out of the 68 percent success rate in brain surgery enabling patients to be seizure-free, is this for a specific type of seizure?
Do the majority of patients who have grand mal seizures benefit from brain surgery?Different types of epilepsy with different locations in the brain may respond differently to epilepsy surgery.
For example, patients who suffered from epilepsy arising from the temporal lobe and a very well defined lesion shown on MRI do much better after brain surgery than patients exhibiting seizures arising from functional areas of the brain and with normal MRI.
What are the criteria to consider surgery as a successful at the 60 to 70 percent range?
Can you describe what is considered a complication?We consider success in epilepsy surgery when seizures are fully controlled —either on or off anti-epileptic medications.
Is the 68 percent seizure free rate after surgery, the percentage that is shown on your website, based on patients with specific types of seizures?Yes, they are based on temporal lobe seizures.
My 30-year-old daughter is scheduled for surgery with Dr. Martinez on December 11 for epilepsy.
What can I expect?
Will she be normal, i.e., minus the seizures, after surgery?
We have been praying really hard.
How long will her recovery be?
How many of these surgeries do you do per year?Epilepsy surgery is safe if performed in the right setting by an experienced surgeon such as Dr. Gonzalez.
Besides the expected postoperative recovery issues, we shouldn’t expect any major complications.
Dr. Gonzalez may have already let you know about or will be sharing any additional information about any complications that are specifically associated with the type of surgery your daughter will be having.
We are very proud of our surgeons and their records in performing epilepsy surgeries for many years.
Can you please tell me if techniques have improved since 1987, so that the post-surgery headaches aren't quite as debilitating as they were following my lobectomy?Many new techniques have been introduced for both the evaluation of patients with epilepsy and their treatment.
This includes major improvements in the EEG (electroencephalogram) video evaluation, MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) accuracy and PET (positron emission tomography) scan.
In addition, newer techniques have been introduced, such as magnetoencephalography (MEG), ictal SPECT (single photon emission tomography), functional MRI and stereoelectroencephalography (SEEG).
For more information and updates, please check our website atwww.clevelandclinic.org/epilepsycenter What exactly is a resection?
Is the hippocampus cut in to separate sections?Resection means the removal of a specific area in the brain.
The hippocampus is not cut into separate sections; it is completely removed.
If your hippocampus is removed, how does that affect your memory?It all depends on the side, and presence or absence of scarring in the hippocampus.
If the seizures are arising from a scarred hippocampus, there is little or no impact of surgery on memory.
If the seizures are starting from a normal-looking left hippocampus and in the setting of good memory, memory may be affected.
My brother has left temporal epilepsy.
He has about five to eight complex partial seizures per day.
Occasionally, he also experiences other unusual seizures.
He has no control, even with medications.
The doctors have been unable to find the focal point.
All they can say is that it is in the left temporal region, and possibly in his hippocampus.
The doctors want to implant grids for a week and run tests to, hopefully, find the focal point.
Can you tell me about grid implants, and what can to expect with these?At Cleveland Clinic, the implantation of grids requires a craniotomy (skull opening) and replacement of electrode grids directly on the brain.
Immediately after the implantation, the patient is sent to an intensive care or post-anesthesia care unit and then transferred to the epilepsy monitoring unit for seizure recording and mapping.
Shortly after surgery, the patient may experience a headache and have swelling of the face.
Can you talk about vagus nerve stimulation (VNS)?
What can one expect with this therapy?VNS is applied as a palliative measure to control seizures.
It will not stop your seizures, and will only partially control them in 40 percent of patients.
The surgery takes about an hour and has minimal complications.
There are two incisions, one in the neck and one in the chest.
A pacemaker is inserted together with an electrode that is connected to the vagal nerve.
Electricity is applied to the nerve to help control the seizures.
Patients usually return home in less than one day.
Follow-up appointments to adjust the VNS are necessary.
Are there any new advances in epilepsy surgery techniques?In the last 10 years, many new techniques have been developed in order to diagnose, localize and treat seizures.
Examples are the SEEG (stereoencephalography), which is a new minimally invasive method to localize seizures that are located in deep areas of the brain.
Another method of treatment is the laser ablation, which allows us to treat deep located seizures with a 1 cm incision allowing the patient to return home within one day in most cases.
My 21-year-old son had a SEEG (stereoelectroencephalography) done at Cleveland Clinic about a year and 1/2 ago.
He had a rare complication from the surgery that was a brain bleed and swelling.
His seizures changed from complex partial to secondary generalized tonic clonic seizures.
If he were to consider surgery evaluation again, would you do intracranial brain mapping this time?
From the SEEG they determined, but not definitely, that his seizures were coming from the temporal pole tip and/or the insula, which is inoperable.
He is currently on Potiga® 1200 mg, Vimpat® 400 mg and Onfi® 20 mg.
Where would you go from here?
He still has seizures, and the longest time he has gone without a seizure is 25 daysObviously, this is a tough situation for your son.
Not knowing the exact details of the previous evaluation, complications and the results makes it very hard for me to comment more specifically on your question.
However, I will be happy to review his records and get back to you and him.
Please contact my office at 216.445.1107 In your opinion do you feel like someone that is uncontrolled and has been uncontrolled should be working?Yes, but it depends on what type of work.
Work that requires driving or operating heavy machinery is, in general, not recommended.
Would it be OK to work as a school teacher?Yes, that should be fine.
Do you find that a majority of patients living with epilepsy work outside the home?Yes.
As we all know, epilepsy can affect any of us, and does not preclude any of us from living and functioning normally in society.
Some of the most brilliant and most influential people in history suffered from epilepsy.
What is the best thing to do after a seizure to care for yourself?If it's an isolated seizure, in general, a resting period of six hours is recommended.
If it's a sequence of seizures, which are unusual to the normal pattern, patients should go to the ER.
Does your electrolyte balance affect your propensity for seizure activity?It may.
The major electrolytes that would decrease your seizure threshold (thereby, increase your seizure activity) include low magnesium, low sodium or low calcium.
