Cleveland Clinic’s Diabetes & Endocrinology Program is ranked second in the nation byU.S.News & World Report’sannual America’s Best Hospitals survey.
Our diabetes education services help teach effective disease management including proper ways to monitor and normalize blood glucose levels, how to avoid long-term complications, strategies to control weight, and how to plan meals and read food labels.
Our diabetes specialists can also provide current research findings, the latest information on nutrition, exercise tips and goal setting strategies.
MyChart®: Your Personal Health Connection, is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org How does a patient know if they are not producing enough insulin nor have insulin resistance?We can do a blood test called a c-peptide.
This is a fragment cleaved off the precursor of insulin.
When it is very low, we know that person is not making much insulin.
This patient will probably have to be treated with insulin and injections or with an insulin pump.
What is A1C?A1C is short for hemoglobin A1c.
Glucose attaches to the last amino acid in hemoglobin.
This changes the charge, and it can be separated from the hemoglobin that has not been modified.
The higher the glucose, the more hemoglobin has glucose attached, so it becomes a measure of how high the glucose has been for the life of a red cell (about 120 days).
How strong is the hereditary risk factor for diabetes if my father became diabetic in his 40s?
He was overweight.
I am not overweight and my numbers have been good when I get a physical.
But will I still have a possibility of getting diabetes if I am doing everything to prevent it?
Can diabetes totally be prevented?You are at greater risk for diabetes mellitus than if none of your relatives had it, but keeping your weight down, eating healthy and getting regular exercise is a great way to keep from realizing your genetic potential.
I have Type 2 diabetes.
Is there a link between diabetes and heart problems?Epidemiologic data shows a correlation between heart disease and Type 2 diabetes.
It is not clear if all can be attributed to the association of hypertension, abnormal lipids and obesity that frequently accompanies Type 2 diabetes, or if there is additional risks that are yet to be identified.
The good news is that attention to control of blood pressure and cholesterol can reduce the risk for heart problems in people with diabetes.
I have been diagnosed with small fiber neuropathy (SFN) at Cleveland Clinic.
The leading cause of this is diabetes.
I have had two negative results for both the A1C and the glucose tolerance tests.
Are there other metabolic problems that are not picked up with these tests?
All of the other possible causes for my SFN also have been ruled out.It has recently been noted that metabolic syndrome (high triglycerides and low HDL [high density lipoprotein] cholesterol as well as hypertension) can be associated with small fiber neuropathy.
A drug that lowers triglycerides and raises HDL cholesterol called fenofibrate has shown benefits in diabetic neuropathy and may be helpful to you if you have those abnormalities.
What are the symptoms of neuropathy?This can be pain or a numb feeling that generally starts in the feet, but can be in the hands and arms as well.
Sometimes it is a prickly sensation.
I've got thyreotoxicosis after amiodarone treatment for atrial fibrillation (flutter).
On my last blood test, my glucose was 125 on an empty stomach.
Is there any connection between hyperthyroidism and diabetes?
I have to mention that my mother suffered from diabetes during her final years.Yes, particularly if your hyperthyroidism was Graves disease.
This is an autoimmune disease that can be associated with damage to the cells that make insulin.
Sometimes blood glucose goes up when a person has hyperthyroidism and comes down when they return to normal, but I would continue to watch your blood glucose as you are now considered pre-diabetic.
With Type 2 diabetes and polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR), how do these affect each other?Polymyalgia rheumatica is usually treated with prednisone, but prednisone causes insulin resistance.
This will raise the blood glucose in people with diabetes or prediabetes.
What is the best treatment for ulcers on the leg resulting from Type 2 diabetes?The best treatment for foot ulcers in patients with diabetes is to keep the ulcers clear, treat any infection with antibiotics and keep the pressure off the ulcer.
This patient might need a special shoe if the ulcer is on the bottom of the foot.
Crutches may be used and avoid bearing weight on that foot.
In some patients, hyperbaric oxygen can help.
I have Type 2 diabetes and I have been on metformin (500 mg twice daily) for the past four years.
It appears to agree with me and I am able to maintain my A1C level around six percent.
However, my serum lactate is more than 2.4, which is very high.
How should I deal with my high lactate level ?I would not worry about an elevated lactate as long as your kidney function is normal and you feel well.
We know metformin interferes with lactate conversion to glucose, so that is why yours is somewhat elevated.
However, lactic acidosis makes you feel sick.
What can you tell me about taking statins and high fasting glucose results?
Before lowering my cholesterol with statins, my fasting glucose was normal.
Now the doctor says I have pre-diabetesIn a large state trial called Jupiter, it was shown that there was more diabetes in patients that received the statin drug, but all the people who developed diabetes had either a fasting blood glucoses above the normal range or a HgbA1c that was in the diabetic range.
What they found is that those people on statin developed diabetes a few months sooner than those without.
In other words, the statin seemed to uncover diabetes that was going to show up in a few months anyway.
We know that statins prevent heart attacks and strokes in people with diabetes, just as they do in people without diabetes, so it is worth it to take them.
I'm a 62-year-old female with Type 2 diabetes.
My A1C runs 6.2 and my blood pressure is 140/86.
I’m on medications for both.
Recently, my physician put me on lovastatin.
My HDL (high density lipoprotein) is 56, and my LDL (low density lipoprotein) is 118.
My total cholesterol is 228 and my triglycerides are 268.
My last examination revealed that my kidneys are leaking a little, but nothing at present for concern.
Once this starts, do they ever get better?
Do I just maintain or does it get worse?The protein in your urine may go back to normal with better blood pressure (BP) control (130 systolic or less)and with certain BP medications called ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blockers.
Do not get discouraged about this.
Is there a point in diabetes when insulin and several pills don’t respond or do well?Usually the combination of insulin and pills can be used to control most patients.
There are new drugs working in different ways that can be used with other pills or with insulin, so that most patients can be controlled.
Can metformin, Byetta® or Victoza® be helpful to a Type I diabetic in addition to taking rapid-acting insulin?
Does cirrhosis of the liver affect the action or duration of insulin?People are just beginning to look at Victoza® -and Byetta®- type agents in Type 1 diabetes, but we do not have much information about this yet.
Cirrhosis can increase the risk for hypoglycemia, especially if on insulin.
Does it make a difference when you take metformin, i.e. before a meal, with a meal, after a meal or two hours after a meal?The only reason metformin is recommended with food is that gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms are lessened that way.
If there are no GI symptoms, it can be taken before or anytime after a meal.
I take Janumet® 50/1000 twice daily.
My A1C and glucose numbers are all great.
Do I need to continue the medication?
Am I still considered diabetic?Yes, you still have diabetes.
You are a well-controlled diabetic.
I would continue the therapy as this is your best chance for avoiding complications that can come with diabetes.
Sometimes when you go off and only restart if your glucose goes up, you do not have a good response as if you had stayed on the agent that got you there.
I know Motrin® is hard on the kidneys, so I discontinued taking 800 mg daily (with a microalbumin/creatinine of 166 mcg), but I ache a lot.
Would it be O.K. if I take half of one once in a while for relief without harm?
Tylenol® is almost useless.Motrin® and similar drugs interfere with the benefits seen with ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers.
They can also raise blood pressure.
Talk with your doctor as there are other agents that can help with pain, particularly neuropathic pain.
Are there any recommended supplements that would be of benefit to most patients with both diabetes and heart disease?There is a possible improvement in heart disease risk with fish oils.
Cinnamon has been shown to help diabetes in some patients with Type 2 diabetes.
Vitamin D is an important supplement that seems to improve the risk for heart disease, osteoporosis, cancer, infection and maybe diabetes, so I recommend that to everyone—especially people who live in northern states.
I take 2000 mg of metformin daily for Type 2 diabetes.
I am noticing that since I started taking this I am experiencing brittle nails and a noticeable loss of hair.
I am concerned that besides blocking the absorption of sugar, the medication is causing malabsorption of some other vital vitamins or minerals.
Could this be possible?We do not think metformin blocks the absorption of glucose, but it does interfere with absorption of vitamin B12.
I don't think this is the cause for your hair and nail problems, but should be checked.
Vitamin D deficiency may affect hair and nails.
Vitamin D supplements of 2000 units per day should replace the deficiency for most people.
If metformin lowers vitamin B12 in blood serum, then can over-the-counter B12 supplements compensate for that loss?Yes.
We recommend that.
Does white bean extract help lower blood sugar?
What is it made from?Sorry, I do not know about that, but many foods, especially whole grains and high fiber foods stimulate hormones from the intestine that do help with diabetes.
What about substituting artificial sugar?
How do these count as carbohydrates?If there are no calories, there are no carbohydrates.
What about exercise for someone with Type 2 diabetes?
Is moderate considered good and extreme bad?Exercise is good for Type 2 diabetes.
If you have complications, you may need to modify what you do for exercise.
Walking is O.K. for most people, but if you have severe neuropathy and deformity in your feet, water exercise may be better.
If you have significant retinopathy, be careful in lifting weights and you should not be hanging upside down.
