At the Center for Specialized Women’s Health at Cleveland Clinic, patients are seen in a caring environment that emphasizes technological excellence as well as emotional well-being.
The Center offers a full range of state-of-the-art services for testing the unique and changing medical needs of women.
We use an interdisciplinary approach to evaluate your problem and arrive at the best treatment for you.
MyChart®: Your Personal Health Connection, is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org How often do I need to get PAP smears once you hit menopause, after getting normal results year-after-year?The guidelines for PAP tests have recently been changed.
If you have always had normal PAP tests and tested negative for HPV (human papillomavirus), then you may go every three to five years before your next PAP test.
Can you please explain FSH and LH numbers as they relate to peri-menopause, menopause and post-menopause?
Do the numbers determine where a patient is in terms of menopause?The hormone levels of FSH and LH may sometimes be checked during the different stages of menopause.
Unfortunately, it is not used as a diagnostic tool because these levels are not constant, and may fluctuate depending on when they are checked.
How is menopause diagnosed?
Just by symptoms or by blood work?It is diagnosed by symptoms and going one year without a menstrual period.
If a woman has had a hysterectomy, this can be more difficult to diagnose.
Therefore, we go by symptoms and may order blood work to check for hormone levels.Hormone levels alone are not diagnostic for menopause.
What are some things I can do to improve the quality of my sleep?
I have stopped all caffeine intake after about 3:00 p.m., and I try to keep the same bedtime hours even on weekends.
The main problem is waking up very hot (with my covers on), and then I get very cold (with my covers off).
This pattern repeats all night long.Getting quality sleep is very important for you to feel energized and for your general well being.
What are the most common signs and symptoms of menopause?The most common symptoms of menopause are hot flashes and night sweats.
Women experience these very differently.
Some women may feel mild symptoms like a flushing in the face, while others may feel severe symptoms of embarrassing sweats and a deep, ‘inferno’-intense type of heat.
How do I know when I'm fully done with menopause?We can say that you have gone through menopause when it has been one full year without a menstrual period.
The average age of menopause is 51 years old, but women may experience this much earlier or later.
I can't seem to lose any weight now that I'm in menopause.
Do you have any suggestions?After menopause, it is known that metabolism slows down greatly.
We tend to store more fat around the abdominal area.
What's the best way to deal with the emotional roller coaster I have been going through?
If my husband doesn't divorce or kill me, I would be surprised!Menopause is a huge change in life that can bring on many different emotional changes, and should not be underestimated.
Hot flashes and night sweats can severely interfere with your quality of sleep, making you feel fatigued, more irritable and even affect your memory.
What are the symptoms of perimenopause?
How do you then know that you've entered menopause?Some women experience the most bothersome symptoms of perimenopause, even before menopause occurs.
I am experiencing hair loss.
Is this common when going through menopause?Hormonal fluctuations during menopause may trigger more hair loss.
What is the best treatment for low libido after a total hysterectomy?There can be many reasons women may feel low libido.
It may be due to avoidance as a result of pain, if you are experiencing vaginal dryness or spasming during intercourse.
There could be factors in the relationship and stress which interfere with a woman's desire.
Should there be any vaginal bleeding during or after menopause?No.
Any bleeding after menopause is considered abnormal and requires immediate evaluation, to rule out any uterine cancer or other structural abnormality.
With all of these bothersome symptoms, I hope there is a light at the end of the tunnel.
What are the positives that I can hope for during and after menopause?Women should embrace this new chapter in their life.
It's often a ‘second honeymoon,’ with no worries about contraception.
Often women are ‘empty nesters,’ leaving them the freedom to focus on their health and relationship with their partner.
Today's postmenopausal woman is a more youthful and vibrant woman, allowing herself to finally be a priority again.
Why do you continue to have occasional hot flashes years after menopause?This occurs because the ovaries are no longer producing estrogen.
Sometimes extra adipose (fat tissue) may produce a small amount of estrogen, which may help alleviate some of the symptoms.
I'm 46 years old, and had a total hysterectomy three years ago.
I do not take any hormones.
I have been having hot flashes and some panic attacks.
I'm afraid to take hormones because of a history of breast cancer in the family.
My mother, aunt and great grandmother all had breast cancer.
Is there a safe way for me to take hormones?It sounds like you are having very bothersome hot flashes, which are really interfering with the quality of your life.
Although I understand your fears of a strong family history of breast cancer, it may not be hereditary.
I have been taking Premarin® 0.625 for over two years after my hysterectomy for uterine cancer (stage 1).
How do I determine when to stop taking the medication?
For the past two weeks I have been out of the medication.
I’m waiting for a mail-order pharmacy to deliver it, but I have not experienced any horrendous hot flashes.
Is there a possibility I could discontinue the Premarin®?
How long is safe to stay on hormone therapy?There is no time frame for how long someone should be on hormone therapy.
It is really dependent on monitoring your symptoms and other medical conditions.
Hot flashes—do they ever stop?
I hate being on Prempro® and risking cancer.Unfortunately, every woman experiences menopausal symptoms differently.
Some women do not experience any hot flashes, while others suffer tremendously.
The same is true for how long they may last.
I had a total hysterectomy at the age of 40 years.
My hot flashes were controlled with Premarin®, but I stopped taking it after the publicity over breast cancer.
I am now 62 years old, and still get significant hot flashes primarily at night, which interrupts my sleep.
What can you suggest for treatment?If the night sweats are really interfering with the quality of your sleep, you may benefit from restarting a low-dose estrogen-only therapy, depending on your risk factors.
What are the different types of hormone therapy?Hormone therapy comes in many different formulations.
There are synthetic hormone therapies as well as bio-identical hormone therapies, which are chemically identical to the body's own hormone.
What are the common side effects of being on hormone therapy?People usually tolerate hormone therapy very well.
The greatest risk of being on any hormone therapy (including birth control) is the rare risk of developing a blood clot.
It is very important that you monitor for any symptoms of pain or swelling in your leg, and notify your physician right away if it occurs.
People who are on natural progesterone may feel a little sleepy.
Therefore, we recommend taking it at night.
Some women may experience some breast tenderness when starting hormone therapy, but this is usually minimal.
I am 45 years old, and had a total hysterectomy one and a half years ago.
I am on estradiol patch.
In your opinion, is there a preference between the patch and oral hormones?
I have issue with the patch coming off during the week.There are different formulations of the patches that are available, such as the Vivelle-dot®(which may have a stronger adhesive).
There are also formulations of gels/creams and sprays.Both oral hormone therapy and transdermal hormone therapy each have a different advantage, depending on your medical history and types of symptoms that you are having.
There may be a lower risk of developing DVT (blood clot) on transdermal therapy.
I am 51 years old, and I had a hysterectomy around 25 years ago.
I have had hot flashes for the last year or so.
I had both ovaries removed one week ago for a large benign cyst.
I have had no hot flashes since the surgery, but I have had some nausea since the surgery.
Can this nausea be due to the loss of hormones?Everyone experiences perimenopausal symptoms differently, but nausea is not a typical symptom of perimenopause or due to fluctuation of hormones.If the symptoms persist, I would recommend further evaluation by your provider.
I am fibrocystic (active family history) and have been told I cannot go on hormone replacement therapy or use any 'natural' products.
What can I do for hot flashes?You may still be a candidate for different formulations of hormone therapy, depending on your complete medical and family history.
You may benefit from further evaluation by a women's health specialist, so that you can be given all of your options in order to make an informed decision for yourself.
Please see my previous responses about non-hormonal ways to treat hot flashes.
What is your opinion of compounded hormone therapy and can you explain it?It is very important to distinguish between compounded hormone therapy and FDA approved hormone therapy.
Does acupuncture help with hot flashes?Acupuncture has been widely used to help treat many differentAgain, the results may vary among women, but I have had many female patients who have experienced good relief of symptoms.
What are the non-hormonal ways to treat menopause symptoms, and are they as effective?The non-hormonal and non-pharmacological ways to treat menopausal symptoms include black cohosh (do not take longer than six months), increasing soy in your diet, behavioral techniques, trigger avoidance and even acupuncture.
Would eating too much sugar cause hot flashes/night sweats?Sugar can be a trigger of hot flashes in some women.
I would avoid sugar and see how your symptoms respond.
What foods or vegetables can you eat to curb the hot flashes?There may be a slight improvement of hot flashes by increasing natural soy products in your diet.
Not all women have the enzyme to convert the soy into estrogen.
We do not recommend soy supplementation.
