Cleveland Clinic's gynecology program is ranked No.3 in the nation byU.S.News & World Reportand isthe top ranked in Ohio.
Cleveland Clinic fertility experts provide the full range of state-of-the-art services for the diagnosis and treatment of infertility, including in vitro fertilization.
Patients are seen in a caring environment, where the major emphasis is not only technological excellence, but also accessibility, personal attention and emotional support.
We have locations throughout Northeast Ohio for your convenience.
MyChart®: Your Personal Health Connection, is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org I am 28 years old and have not had a menstrual cycle since going off birth control, and my doctor recently prescribed Premphase® to help regulate my cycles.
He said that, if I want to conceive, I would have to go through a process called superovulation.
I would like to try some natural remedies before I try fertility drugs.
Do you have any recommendations on natural remedies that I could take with Premphase®?I think you should discuss with your doctor why you haven’t had a menstrual cycle yet, since you have stopped taking birth control.
Some women who take birth control pills may not have menstrual periods.
When birth control pills are stopped, it may take three to six months to resume regular ovulation and menstruation.
I have stage 4 endometriosis.
I was told that it doesn't really cause infertility, but then when you go online it says it can.
I am confused.
My husband and I have been trying for awhile with no luck.
Can it truly cause infertility?In general, women with endometriosis have a lower chance of getting pregnant than women in the general population.
Endometriosis itself can sometimes cause an unpleasant environment for the eggs and, in turn, this causes a decrease in fertilization.
Many women with stage 4 endometriosis have scar tissue in the pelvis or around the fallopian tubes, which make the tubes unable to pick up the eggs each month.
If you have a cyst from endometriosis (called endometrioma), the cyst sometimes destroys part of your normal ovary and could cause you to have a lower egg reserve (egg supply).
If you have been trying to conceive for a while, you should go ahead and seek help from an infertility specialist to see if there is anything we can do to help you get pregnant soon.
Despite that, we tell everyone to try to conceive for a year before seeking medical advice.
Women with a history of endometriosis, previous pelvic infection, polycystic ovary syndrome, or low egg supply, or those with a partner with a low sperm count should consult with their physician sooner.
I've lost four early pregnancies that were six weeks along or earlier.
Is there anything beyond karyotypes and clotting profiles that we should be looking at?
I've also had an HSG (hysterosalpingogram, an x-ray that shows the inside of the uterus, fallopian tubes, and surrounding area), which came back normal.It looks like your doctor has done a great job of helping you find out why you have had four miscarriages.
I assume that both you and your partner had karyotyping done to check your number of chromosomes.
Along with clotting profiles and HSG, these are the most important tests we do for women with recurrent miscarriages.
If there is a concern that you might have a problem with egg supply, you should also have that checked.
This test is done by blood work and ultrasound.
I also assume that your physician checked to make sure that you don't have any uncontrolled medical conditions, such as diabetes and thyroid disease, which also could cause miscarriages.
What might a patient going through infertility and assisted reproduction overlook?
What should we ask our doctors, the insurance company and the pharmacy?Your question is quite broad because there are so many causes of infertility.
If you have concerns that there may be things that your doctor might have overlooked, it would be best to seek a second opinion.
We have six physicians in our division, with several offices located throughout the Cleveland area for your convenience (including Cleveland Clinic’s main campus, the family health and surgery centers in Beachwood and Strongsville, Solon Family Health Center, the Cleveland Clinic Richard E. Jacobs Health Center in Avon, and the Canfield Telemedicine Office for Youngstown).
I have been tested for polycystic ovary syndrome, a pituitary tumor and thyroid problems.
I do have low estrogen and, therefore, the physician wants to protect me from bone loss.
He is saying that it is unexplained infertility.
Do you have any suggestions on other natural remedies that I could try in conjunction with Premphase®?Approximately 10 percent of couples who are infertile are diagnosed with unexplained infertility.
This means that physicians cannot determine the reason why you are unable to conceive.
It seems as if your physician thinks that you might not be ovulating every month, and therefore you do not have a period on your own.
Some natural remedies such as soy supplements might slightly increase the estrogen level in your body.
However, it would be difficult to know if it would help protect your bone or not.
Can you take too much folic acid?It is recommended that you take at least 400 micrograms of folic acid per day while trying to conceive.
In women with a history of having a child with a birth defect called neural tube defects, the recommended dose of folic acid is 4 mg a day.
Although it is quite a high dose of folic acid, it is safe to take.
So, I don't think you need to worry about taking too much folic acid.
In women with polycystic ovary syndrome, can Femara® induce ovulation when Clomid® has not?Yes.
Femara®(or letrozole) is an alternative treatment to help with ovulation in women with PCOS.
Femara®works a little differently than Clomid®in terms of how it helps your ovulation.
While you are taking letrozole, which is given for five days starting on the third day of your menstrual cycle—just like how you take Clomid®, your body stops making estrogen for a couple of days.
In turns, your body works harder to produce an egg (or ovulate).
Another good thing about Femara®is that it has fewer side effects than Clomid®.
This medication, however, is not FDA-approved for infertility treatment.
Nevertheless, there are studies that show that it works as well as Clomid®, and it doesn't increase your risks of birth defects if you take it to help with ovulation.
So, yes—in my opinion, Femara®definitely would be the next step if Clomid®doesn't work for you.
Would you recommend a combination of different medications like Clomid®and soy isoflavones together?There are no studies showing whether adding supplements such as soy isoflavones would help Clomid®work better or not.
I think that as long as those supplements are safe to take and you would like to take them, you should be fine to take them together.
You and your physician should discuss whether the medications and supplements that you are currently taking are safe to take during pregnancy.
If your physician feels that any of your medications are not safe to take during pregnancy, he or she might offer alternative options that are safer for you instead.
We certainly encourage women who are trying to conceive to take a daily prenatal vitamin with folic acid to decrease the risk of having a baby with a neural tube defect.
I am 44 years old and have three children.
I had a Gonal-f® injection, but it didn't work.
I never had any problem getting pregnant before.
Is there another medication that I could try?I assume that you did respond to the hormone in Gonal-f®, a fertility shot to help you make two to three eggs each month, but you did not conceive.
Unlike men, women are born with the all of the eggs they will ever have.
The number of eggs (or ovarian reserve) declines with age.
The rate of decline happens very rapidly when women are in their 40s.
Therefore, women in their 40s have a hard time conceiving.
Due to the decreased egg supply, fertility medications do not work as well in older women and it might not increase their chance of getting pregnant.
So, unfortunately, I don't think that fertility medication will increase your chance of getting pregnant at this point.
If you had no problem getting pregnant in the past, despite the odds being low, you might still have a chance of having another child on your own.
Unfortunately, the fertility medication might not be helpful for you.
Why wouldn't someone elect intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) during in vitro fertilization (IVF)?
It seems you would get the most 'bang for your buck' using ICSI.In vitro fertilization (IVF) is a method of assisted reproductive technology that involves removing mature eggs from women's ovaries, fertilizing the eggs with sperm, incubating the dividing cells (also called embryos) in a culture dish, and then replacing the developing embryo in the uterus at the appropriate time.
IVF is indicated in couples with male factor infertility, tubal damage, genetic defects that require embryo testing, and for those couples who have failed other conservative treatments.
IVF is also an option for women with poor ovarian reserve (low egg supply) and endometriosis.
Prior to removing the mature eggs from the ovaries, the female partner will need to take fertility shots to increase the number of mature egg production (ovulation induction).
For an employee with the Employee Health Plan insurance, what is the cost of IVF with ICSI?ICSI is included in our package.
Please call the office at 216.839.3150, ext.
5 to discuss costs.
For an employee with the Employee Health Plan insurance, what is the cost of cryopreservation of an embryo formed through IVF, and then transferring this embryo at a later time to the body?The cost to store cryopreserved embryos is $396 this year and does increase yearly by approximately three percent.
For employee pricing, please call our office at 216.839.3150, ext.
5.
Is money refunded if IVF is unsuccessful?If you purchase a package from a company called ARC, you can buy a guaranteed price refund package, but they are expensive.
Their phone number is 888.990.2727.
Does Cleveland Clinic and the pharmacy require all payment for assisted reproduction before the process begins?
Are there incremental payment plans available?The medication is purchased from the pharmacy like all other medications.
IVF does require the prepayment to be made by the time you start your first ultrasound treatment.
Is the ARC (Advanced Reproductive Care loans) program credit-based?
Does it honor Cleveland Clinic Employee Health Plan pricing?ARC does look at your credit and can refuse patients.
If you are a Cleveland Clinic employee, it is not worth using the ARC package.
How much money should I expect to spend in medication for IVF?Generally, medication cost is approximately $2,800, but some patients may need to use more medication and others less, which affects the price.
I live in central Ohio and have been consulting a doctor locally for the past three years, but I am starting to think I want a second opinion.
My insurance coverage is 70/30, but my understanding is that second opinions aren't usually covered by insurance.
So what does that look like financially?Please check with your insurance company to see if a second opinion would be covered.
If you have a 70/30 split, your 30 percent is usually less than you think because of contractual agreements between the hospital and your insurance carrier.
Does Cleveland Clinic accept CareCredit® Health Care Finance as a method of payment for assisted reproduction?We do not accept CareCredit® Health Care Finance.
What is the cost for IVF and for artificial insemination?One cycle of IVF if your insurance covered nothing would be approximately $15,000.
The cost of artificial insemination is $452.
Do you know of any type of grants or anything that can be used to cover some of the cost for fertility treatments?Typically there are no studies or grants for fertility service, but Cleveland Clinic has just started a fund called Harboring Hope.
This program requires patients to pay for 1 cycle of IVF and then if they meet the Harboring Hoperequirements, they could be eligible for a free or greatly reduced second cycle of fertility treatment.
I've been trying to conceive for almost four years with unexplained infertility.
I have had two miscarriages and three failed intrauterine inseminations.
What are the costs associated with infertility treatment at Cleveland ClinicIt depends on the treatment that is recommended for you.
Inseminations are $452 plus the cost of medications.
Do you offer infertility trials and what does that involve?Infertility is an elective procedure and clinical trials are very rare.
