Dr. Vrooman, thank you for joining the chat today.
Let's begin with some of the questions that have been submitted.
Since the end of May, I have been having sporadic pain about two inches below my navel, slightly to the right.
Have also lost 20 lbs.
My primary physician at first thought it was irritable bowel syndrome.
He ran numerous tests, including blood work, abdominal and pelvic scan, and a colonoscopy.
All were normal.
The gastroenterologist thought that it may be a nerve entrapment or adhesions due to two prior cesarean sections.
(The first was an emergency surgery with a vertical incision.)
I also had a laparotomy.
I also have many spinal issues and attend pain management.
My latest MRI showed increased thoracic dextroscoliosis (side-to-side scoliosis) and kyphosis.
I also have numerous issues in the lumbar area with the worst being moderate-to-severe grade1 anterolisthesis and severe right foraminal stenosis.
Last week, the doctor at pain management suggested that this pain may be due to an abdominal neuroma—most likely from all the abdominal surgeries.
He said that he could do cortisone injections to relieve it.
Could you please give your opinion on abdominal neuromas.
It is fortunate that your laboratory work, imaging studies, and colonoscopy do not necessarily reveal conditions that merit further study or additional surgery.
The spine issues you are having (dextroscoliosis, kyphosis, anterolisthesis, and foraminal stenosis) are likely contributing to your back pain and, depending upon the vertebral levels involved, radicular pain traveling down your leg.
As you mentioned, this is being treated by your pain management physician.
Physical therapy and possibly epidural steroid injections could help.
My gynecologist stated that numerous spinal problems may also contribute to abdominal pain.
What is your opinion on that statement?
Her statement is true.
Nerve impingement in the spine, depending upon the level, may be contributing to pain.
Occasionally, thoracic epidural steroid injections could help if it a protruding intervertebral disk or foraminal stenosis is contributing to the patient's pain.
I have had numerous abdominal surgeries (both laparoscopic and open) for gynecologic and urologic issues.
I am assuming that I have many adhesions.
Occasionally I have pain that occurs out of the blue or when I press on my abdomen.
I have had an MRI to rule out any mass.
Can adhesions actually cause pain?
And is there anything that can be done?
You have had multiple surgeries.
Surgeries may result in adhesions that could be contributing to pain.
Occasionally, surgeons may perform lysis (separation) of adhesions to reduce the number of adhesions present.
However, additional surgery increases the likelihood of more adhesions.
The diffuse, vague abdominal pain that occurs sporadically may diminish over time or respond to treatment with a trial of medications such as membrane-stabilizing medications.
There are risks and potential benefits associated with all medications including this class.
A celiac plexus block or a splanchnic plexus block are procedures we perform in the pain management clinic that may help in the treatment of vague and diffuse visceral pain.
(Plexus means a nerve network.)
If this does help in the treatment, the block can be repeated or radiofrequency ablation could possibly be considered.
I am a 74-year-old female.
I am dealing with a lot of lower abdominal pain, mainly on my lower left side.
I also have rectal bleeding issues when going to the bathroom three or four times per week.
I did have a sigmoidoscopy in 2008 and a colonoscopy in 2011.
The gastroenterologist said nothing was wrong, but I possibly had a fistula I would have to live with.
Rectal bleeding warrants a thorough evaluation by your gastroenterologic or colorectal surgery team.
It is important to note when you are having the bleeding, the color of the blood, and if this coincides with when you are having pain.
As with any pain condition, if there is an underlying active medical problem causing pain, it merits a full investigation into this problem.
Treatment of the problem may understandably reduce the pain.
In your particular situation, it is difficult to tell what is contributing to the bleeding given that you have had a quite thorough work-up.
I would ensure that your colorectal surgeon also knows about this bleeding and inquire if, in fact, you do have a fistula that can be treated with surgery.
My wife, who has scheduled an appointment with you, has had undiagnosed abdominal pain for over one and one half years.
She has had many diagnostic tests (endoscopies, endoscopic ultrasounds, stomach emptying studies, blood work, and imaging services) performed by primary care doctors and gastroenterologists.
Pain doctors even tried an abdominal injection once, and a celiac plexus block at a later date, but it offered with no help.
The consistent theme has thought to have been some sort of nerve damage issues, possible developing many years after gall bladder removal.
What additional options might you offer?
We have heard about more aggressive nerve block procedures or trying additional abdominal injections.
Patients frequently see me with a known diagnosis, such as chronic pancreatitis, that may be causing them pain.
Here, the treatment options may be quite specific and include changes in lifestyle, avoiding alcohol, changing a diet, or performing procedures such as celiac plexus blocks, splanchnic radiofrequency ablation, and neurostimulation.
(Plexus means a nerve network.)
Thanks for the advice and encouragement.
It is nice to know that at least you have ideas.
My wife is here with me, and reminded me that she is scheduled for an electromyogram (EMG) at The Ohio State University Hospitals, in Columbus, the day before we see you.
Would you recommend that she still have the EMG?
No problem!
Yes, please have the EMG to rule out any specific nerve entrapment or injury that could be contributing to her pain.
I have a very severe pain on my right side under the chest and above the belly.
I had a CAT scan, and the results were fine, However, the left ovarian vein is dilated, and there are multiple large venous structures on the left side of my pelvis.
There is a corpus luteum cyst in the right ovary, but the uterus is normal.
Apart from this I'm having continuous diarrhea for about one and one half months.
All of my blood work and stool tests are normal.
The ultrasound also showed that the pain isn't caused by the cyst.
I don't know what the cause is or how to treat this pain.
I'm scheduled for an endoscopy and colonoscopy soon.
I don't know if this would help to find the cause of pain.
I have to pass gas and burp, after I eat but the pain still doesn't go away.
It's always there even if am hungry or full.
It gets worse and worse by the end of the day, or if I stand or walk for long periods of time.
I took the Plan B pill (the ‘morning after’ birth control pill) two months ago and the pain started almost four days after I had that pill.
But I never had such experience before whenever I took this pill before.
What do you think might be the cause of the pain?
And how should I get it treated?
It is difficult to identify the specific cause of your pain as there could be multiple causative factors.
I would be interested in finding the results of the endoscopy and colonoscopy.
I also would discuss with your gynecologist your particular response to the Plan B pill.
Like with any medication, there can be side effects, although I would need to see if such pain has been described previously in the medical literature.
I have been in disabling pain since I was 16 years old.
I've had many tests and work ups.
I have undergone a partial hysterectomy, and since then the pain has gotten worse.
I am now being told it is in my head, and this is how my body handles stress.
I am feeling hopeless.
Do you have any suggestions on what route— if any— I should take?
When a person experiences pain, such as after a surgery, there can be ‘centralization’ of pain in the nervous system.
Thus, pain may continue unabated (at original intensity) long after the original acute pain.
We wish to use all possible treatment options to reduce this pain.
Frequently, I work in conjunction with an abdominal pain psychologist who can train patients to use biofeedback, relaxation strategies, and other options to help in reducing the pain.
The pain is not in your head, per se, but all pain pathways do involve the brain.
Training the individual to help reduce pain can be very effective.
Fortunately, counseling may help in the treatment of depression that frequently accompanies chronic pain.
Also, very fortunately, there are antidepressants in the category called SNRIs (serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors) that help treat both pain and depression.
You are not alone in feeling both pain and depression.
You may benefit from being treated in a multidisciplinary pain clinic.
What do you do when the doctors are telling you that it is all in your head?
I have had many diagnostic tests with no results.
I can't believe that this pain is not real.
I have an appointment with a psychiatrist to see if he can offer me any relief.
Do I just give up and believe them, or do I keep trying to find an answer?
Your pain is real, although frequently it is difficult to identify the specific cause of the pain.
It may be due to the centralization of pain that I mentioned in response to an earlier question.
Pain can be exasperating because of the hurt caused by pain, but also by a lack of control a patient seems to have in treating the pain.
Patients I see used to be fully engaged in work, life at home exercise, and other activities until their particular pain affected all of these things, contributing to worsening pain and despair.
Do not give up!
Treatment can be very effective.
It just depends on the particular treatment needed, either with a pain psychologist or a team approach toward treatment.
Has there been success with the spinal cord stimulator for abdominal pain?
Yes.
I have a number of patients who have excellent relief from abdominal pain with spinal cord stimulation.
However, it is best chosen for patients who have appropriate expectations for such neurostimulation.
I have found that patients who benefitted from blocks have obtained longer duration of relief from stimulators in the treatment of their pain.
Peripheral nerve stimulators may be helpful for specific peripheral nerve injury whereas spinal cord stimulators have been helpful with diffuse, visceral abdominal pain.
As mentioned regarding chronic pancreatitis, spinal cord stimulation can be helpful for this pain condition.
We need more prospective randomized controlled trials in the field of neurostimulation to be able to predict success from this treatment option.
What is the recommended course of treatment for someone with debilitating chronic pancreatitis pain?
There are different factors that may contribute to chronic pancreatitis (CP).
Reducing triggers is the first step.
A celiac or splanchnic plexus block may help.
(Plexus refers to a nerve network.)
Splanchnic radiofrequency may help if the initial block results were temporary.
Neurostimulation may be very helpful in the treatment of this condition for the appropriate patient.
We have performed a retrospective trial on patients implanted with neurostimulators at Cleveland Clinic, and found the results to be impressive.
(We look forward to a prospective randomized controlled trial for evaluating neurostimulation in the treatment of CP.)
There are surgical options including total pancreatectomy and auto islet cell transplantation, which is performed in our department of surgery, although this is for refractory CP (pancreatitis that can be treated alternatively) in the properly selected patient.
