What are the reasons someone would need to be put on bed rest?
How does it help?
Many patients are put on bed rest when they are at risk for premature delivery and for high blood pressure.
Patients who have an incompetent cervix with a stitch placed may also be put on bed rest.
Bed rest has become more controversial recently.
Many obstetricians question the efficacy of bed rest in preventing premature births since most studies show that it doesn't improve outcomes.
Also, potential complications from bed rest include an increase in blood clots in the lower extremities.
A friend of mine recently had something called PUPPP rash.
What is it and can I prevent it in my pregnancy?
How is it treated?
Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP), also known as polymorphic eruption of pregnancy.
This is a benign condition to both mother and baby.
However, it can be extremely annoying.
This condition is usually treated with topical ointments and baths and usually resolves with delivery.
There is no way to prevent this—it is random.
What is preterm labor?
What does it feel like?
How is it treated?
Preterm labor is labor that begins prior to 37 weeks of pregnancy.
For most patients it feels the same as labor feels when the baby is at term, but labor varies from patient to patient.
Most studies show that once preterm labor becomes advanced, the labor will be stopped and the baby will be delivered early.
At what point is it safe to start forms of induction, i.e. stripping membranes or stretching the cervix to get labor moving?
Usually, these techniques can be applied at 38 to 40 weeks.
It’s my first pregnancy, and I’m not sure what to expect.
What are the benefits of a water birth versus a bed birth?
How long do you have to be actually pregnant before the pregnancy is induced?
Water births have recently become popular—but there are benefits and risks.
This is something to discuss with your OB/GYN (obstetrician-gynecologist).
Typically, obstetricians do not allow a pregnancy to go beyond 42 weeks, but there may be small increased risks with going on 41 weeks of pregnancy that should be discussed with your physician.
Are forceps or vacuum methods commonly used during delivery?
I hear a lot of scary things about forceps.
Are they safe?
It depends on the hospital where you deliver.
Forceps and vacuum deliveries are safe when used by experienced obstetricians.
I mostly use a vacuum, but some physicians feel more comfortable with forceps.
What happens to cause a baby to be breech (feet first presentation)?
Can a breech baby be safely delivered vaginally?
No one knows for sure what causes a baby to be breech.
However, one theory is that many breech babies have a head that is likely too large for the woman's pelvis, and nature is attempting to put something smaller in position for delivery.
I am scheduled for a vaginal delivery, but what are the circumstances that could occur that would change it to a C-section (Cesarean)?
There are numerous conditions that may warrant a change prior to labor—too many different things to go into here.
The most common is a breech or transverse presentation of the baby.
However, most primary, or first, C-sections are performed during labor.
The most common reasons are failure to progress, which can be failure to get to full cervical dilatation, an inability to push the baby out and fetal distress prior to the end of labor (when the mom is not fully dilated).
With my first baby 14 months ago, I was brought in for induction with complications, including eclampsia and/or HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count) syndrome, three days before my due date.
It was caught with blood work the day before delivery.
Prior to induction, my doctor realized the baby flipped to breech overnight, so I had a C-section as to not further injure my liver.
I am now two weeks from my due date with my second baby.
Any insight about whether these ‘flukes’ could happen again?
Also, am I a good candidate for vaginal birth after cesarian (VBAC)?
So far, there are no signs of complications and the baby’s head is facing down.
How safe are VBACs?
When I mention to people that I am planning to have one, they become very concerned and ask if it's safe.
What are the success rates?
You likely had preeclampsia with HELLP syndrome.
Eclampsia is preeclampsia with a seizure.
I'm assuming you would have remembered if you had a seizure!
Preeclampsia is a condition that includes elevated blood pressure, increased urine protein and edema (body swelling).
HELLP syndrome is a complication of preeclampsia that includes hemolysis (breakdown of red blood cells), elevated liver enzymes and low platelets.
You likely had a cesarean for the breech as there is a high rate of complications associated with a vaginal breech delivery.
This is the best scenario for attempting a VBAC.
Our overall success with VBAC is about 60 percent, but with a previous c-section for a breech baby the rate is much higher.
The only caveat is that you need to make sure that your c-section was performed as a low-transverse incision It doesn't matter what the skin incision looks like—only the uterine incision counts.
Any other type of incision increases the risk of a uterine rupture in labor to an unsafe level.
A low transverse incision has a risk of 1 percent of uterine rupture during labor after c-section.
You should discuss this with your obstetrician prior to making an attempt at vaginal delivery.
A friend recently had a rough delivery--she wound up with a uterine infection and the full-term baby was in the NICU for a few days on antibiotics.
What is a uterine infection, what are the risk factors, and how common are they?
How does a uterine infection affect the mom and baby?
Most likely your friend experienced a prolonged labor which increased her risk for a infection.
Uterine infection is typically an infection of the lining of the uterus that may also lead to an infection in the newborn.
