Hello.
Is it better to be treated for one issue at a time?
How effective is acupuncture for eating issues?
How many times a week do you recommend going?
How long does it typically take for a person to recover?
How effective is acupuncture for depression?
How many times a week do you recommend going?
How long does it typically take for a person to recover?
Since I have multiple issues (such as migraines, frozen shoulder pain, plantar fasciitis, etc.) can this be addressed all at once or do you concentrate on one area at a time?
While each acupuncturist is different, most treat multiple conditions at one time.
The idea in Eastern medicine is to treat the whole person, so oftentimes, these individual symptoms are actually related in Chinese Medicine theory.
We diagnose at the root level, so it is very common that main complaints resolve in addition to side benefits.
Just from a superficial understanding of your issues, it appears very reasonable that all of these can be addressed during the same treatment session.
Is there anything we can do ourselves to extend the effects of the acupuncture treatment.
Acupressure is a means to extend the effects of acupuncture for some conditions.
I will oftentimes teach patients specific points to apply self-acupressure, or I will send them home with "ear seeds," which are tiny balls placed on very specific portions of the ear with adhesive tape.
This is another application of acupressure.
Common conditions that can be helped with acupressure include: fatigue, insomnia, pain, tobacco cessation, morning sickness/nausea and menstrual cramps.
Talk to your acupuncturist about acupressure techniques that may be applicable to your condition.
I had received acupuncture in 2011.
The treatment was a mixture of ling ku plus da bai.
During treatment, my diaphragm stopped functioning and I was unable to breath.
The needles were removed before total loss of consciousness, but the resulting feeling was that of a cardiac event.
The next day, I was found to have an ascending aortic aneurysm.
I was told by two other acupuncturists that my system was extremely "revved up."
This was evident by hypertension that I had never had before this treatment.
My question is how long can the negative effects of an acupuncture treatment last, and have you ever heard of an acupuncture treatment creating an aneurysm?
I also lost 20 pounds. within three weeks of this treatment.
Hi.
What is the risk of having acupuncture while taking Xarelto®?
I have a pacemaker.
Would energizing the needles electrically cause any interference with the pacer?
Excellent question.
Electro-acupuncture is contraindicated in patients with a pacemaker.
Your acupuncturist should be well versed in this and be able to modify the treatment accordingly.
Will I experience improvement right away or does it take several weeks before I notice a benefit from acupuncture?
There is a spectrum of response.
I have patients who respond within one to three treatments, and then there are others who do not reach therapeutic effect until 10+ visits.
There are many variables that factor into response, including the severity of the condition, underlying cause of condition, etc.
I typically recommend eight to 10 consecutive weekly treatments as a full course.
I will then stop and re-assess the patient's condition after the course is complete.
The goal is to reach therapeutic effect and then begin tapering visits so that patients come in on an as-needed basis.
Do I have to believe in acupuncture to get it to work?
While there is certainly the power of the mind-body connection in terms of healing, you do not have to necessarily "believe" in acupuncture for it to work.
We know through much rigorous scientific investigation that acupuncture influences the body in many different ways.
It influences the nervous system, promotes a release of endorphins, which provides an analgesic effect, modulates the immune system, increases natural killer cell activity, suppresses the expression of cytokines to provide an anti-inflammatory effect, just to name a few.
I have a herniated disc, level C5-6, and two bulging discs on other cervical levels, as well as osteoarthritis in several areas.
Will acupuncture help with pain relief?
I can no longer take NSAIDs.
I've had two nerve root steroid injections with some relief, but would like more relief.
I’m sorry to hear about the pain you’re experiencing in your neck due to herniated discs and arthritis.
Acupuncture is indeed a great option for you in terms of pain relief.
Specifically for your condition, acupuncture works two-fold to get you the results you need: first, it acts as an analgesic by manipulating the nervous system to promote a pain-relieving effect through the release of endorphins.
Second, many studies have shown acupuncture’s anti-inflammatory effect, which is optimal for you since you can no longer take NSAIDs.
Acupuncture works well with your conventional treatment, so you can seek out acupuncture treatment even after you’ve had the steroid injections.
A large meta-analysis published by Vickers et. al. in the Archives of Internal Medicine (2012) looked at nearly 18,000 patients in chronic pain, including neck pain.
Their analysis showed that acupuncture was superior to both sham and non-needling control groups in decreasing pain.
I have a daughter who has a condition called occipital neuralgia, where she gets pain in the back of her head.
Would acupuncture help this condition or if not, is there anything else you might recommend?
Acupuncture would be a fantastic option for your daughter.
Please be sure she sees a clinician who comes highly referred and is willing to be a team player with your daughter's neurologist.
I may also suggest she seek out a physician who practices integrative or functional medicine to be sure there are no underlying causes of this condition that may have been overlooked by standard conventional doctors.
A good massage therapist and chiropractor may also provide some benefit.
Can chronic pain be treated without knowing what its origins are?
Many times, our patients who come in with chronic pain have seen a myriad of specialists yet the origin of their pain is still unclear.
Acupuncture can be used to address chronic pain by manipulating the nervous system to promote a pain-relieving response through the release of endorphins (body's natural opiate), local neurotransmitters influenced by the needling process to help promote pain relief.
If you have exhausted conventional pain management approaches, it would be worthwhile to seek out the help of an acupuncturist.
I've had tension knots in my shoulders/neck for years.
Massage helps but has never fully "broken up" the knots.
How could acupuncture help this?
Acupuncture needles can be inserted into the various active trigger points.
The acupuncturist can manipulate the needles to elicit a twitch response, which automatically resets the muscle, alleviating the spasm.
I have severe chronic neck and shoulder pain, and a few weeks ago decided to seek acupuncture treatment from a highly recommended practitioner.
After a quick exam, he said I had both fibromyalgia and arthritis, which could be treated with acupuncture.
The insertion of the needles did not bother me, and I was pleased to find there was no problem due to the fact that I am on Coumadin.
Heat from a heat lamp was added to the treatment and I was fine with that, but then without warning, the acupuncturist began doing very deep and very painful muscle massage in my back and neck area.
I am not unusually susceptible to pain, so the intensity of pain came as a real surprise to me.
I would like to continue acupuncture treatment but am afraid to go back and face that pain again.
Is this kind of painful deep-muscle massage a usual part of acupuncture treatment?
Would it be reasonable to ask him to just do the acupuncture with no massage?
I’m so sorry you experienced the discomfort during the treatment.
In a typical acupuncture treatment, the patient lies either on their back or stomach and fine, hair-thin needles are placed into specific areas of the body predetermined by the acupuncturist.
The needles are then retained for approximately 30 minutes while the patient rests comfortably in a room that is often enhanced with ambient lighting and soothing music.
Massage is not a typical modality incorporated into an acupuncture treatment.
It is possible your acupuncturist also has a license in massage therapy, in which case it is their own unique treatment style to incorporate massage techniques, but this is definitely not the norm.
If you have a follow-up visit scheduled, I would let the practitioner know that the massage portion of the treatment was very uncomfortable and to omit that from the treatment plan.
Any acupuncturist should be very open to your feedback and adjust the treatment style accordingly.
Can acupuncture help in alleviating sinus drainage?
Acupuncture is quite an effective treatment for symptoms of seasonal allergies.
In fact, a study published in Annals of Internal Medicine in 2013 looked at 422 patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis.
The study compared acupuncture with an antihistamine to just an antihistamine alone.
After eight weeks of treatment, results showed statistically significant improvements in the acupuncture group with seasonal allergy symptoms (nose symptoms, eye symptoms, overall quality of life symptoms) in addition to decreased antihistamine use.
I encourage patients to come in for weekly consecutive treatments about eight weeks prior to their worst allergy season to get a head start on their symptom management.
Hi.
I do have several patients that I treat for Raynaud's.
Generally, you would see an acupuncturist for a first visit consultation, at which point the clinician would formulate a Chinese Medicine diagnosis and treatment strategy.
I generally recommend eight to 10 consecutive weekly treatments as one full course.
I will then stop and re-assess therapeutic efficacy after that course is complete and then visits are tapered.
It is very common that patients with Raynaud's need to come in much more frequently in the colder months.
We work to help increase blood flow in the limbs in addition to addressing any pain.
Thanks for your question.
Assuming you are being closely followed by your urologist, I would also recommend Chinese herbal therapy to help in terms of prevention.
It might also be beneficial for you to seek out a consult with a physician who practices integrative or functional medicine, who will look at your condition through a slightly different lens than your conventional physician to try to pinpoint any underlying causes for the chronic kidney stones.
Have you seen acupuncture provide relief for fibromyalgia?
Fibromyalgia pain is a very common complaint we see at the Center.
Acupuncture is an excellent pain management treatment option for many different types of conditions.
We aim to decrease pain scores and also manage triggers that may exacerbate pain, such as decrease stress and help improve sleep.
Evidence-based guidelines for the treatment of fibromyalgia vary amongst different countries.
As reported in the Journal of Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine, Germany and Israel recommend the use of acupuncture in addition to hypnosis/guided imagery and Tai Chi.
In my clinical practice, I don’t generally recommend acupuncture to specifically help with bone density.
Acupuncture is most appropriately used for pain that may be associated with osteoporosis, such as back pain.
The clinical evidence is not strong.
I only know of one small study in China showing favorable effects of acupuncture on bone mineral density in postmenopausal women and one study using electro-acupuncture in the rabbit model.
I would strongly encourage you to use conventional medicine to address osteoporosis concerns, enhanced with a regular weight training and exercise program, which have been shown to help preserve bone density.
Use acupuncture and other Traditional Chinese Medicine treatments as an adjunct treatment for pain control.?p Has any attempt been made to see if acupuncture can help patients who have Parkinson's disease?
If so, what was the result?
Last year, in the Journal of the Neurological Sciences, a group from Korea analyzed 11 studies looking at acupuncture’s effect on Parkinson’s disease.
The group concluded there was not enough evidence showing the effectiveness on acupuncture for treating Parkinson’s.
The studies were of mixed design and results.
Three studies did show that patients using acupuncture with conventional drugs reported beneficial effects of acupuncture.
Our acupuncture team at the Tanya I. Edwards MD Center for Integrative Medicine see Parkinson’s patients as an adjunct to their conventional western medical treatment plan.
Empirically, we see that acupuncture coupled with their standard treatment helps to improve stress levels, sleep and general quality of life.
All improvements indirectly work toward managing tremor activity and other symptoms of Parkinson’s.
We also encourage our patients to maintain a regular exercise regimen and follow a clean healthy diet.
I have lupus and I know acupuncture can help with my inflammation.
Do you know if there is any Chinese medicine or nature diet for lupus and how can I get it?
A combination of acupuncture and Chinese herbal therapy would be a good option.
If you pursue Chinese herbs, the skill of the herbalist and quality of the herbs are imperative.
Additionally, having a consultation by a physician who practices integrative medicine would be recommended, as they could provide you with dietary and supplement advice.
You should always seek out someone who is state licensed, who comes highly referred.
If you’re interested in someone who practices Chinese Medicine, you can go to theNational Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine's websiteand search a practitioner by ZIP code.
Can acupuncture help in relieving bile duct spasms?
I would not recommend acupuncture as a primary treatment option for bile duct spasms.
The pain may be relieved through acupuncture, so it's definitely worth exploring, but I would be most concerned that the underlying issue for the spasm be determined and addressed appropriately by your physician.
There are no clinical studies that I know of looking at acupuncture for bile duct spasm.
Why don't more insurance health care providers recognize this form of treatment?
I have lower back issues and would absolutely love to try this as an alternative treatment; however, it is not on the list of treatment options.
I absolutely agree and feel just as frustrated as you.
Unfortunately, health coverage is variable depending on company, state, plan, etc.
You can have one health insurance company cover acupuncture in New York but not touch it in Ohio.
Low back pain is the top condition we treat at the Center for Integrative Medicine.
The data surrounding acupuncture's effectiveness in treating low back pain was so convincing that Germany makes acupuncture standard of care for low back pain treatment.
The landscape of health care coverage is ever-changing.
I'm hopeful that with more patient demand, more clinical trial data and more data to support the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture, we will eventually see more widespread coverage.
Can you tell me what costs are covered with the Cleveland Clinic health plan?
Unfortunately, our Cleveland Clinic health plan discontinued acupuncture coverage back in 2011.
The Tanya I. Edwards MD Center for Integrative Medicine charges $100 per visit, and Cleveland Clinic employees receive a 20 percent discount ($80 out-of-pocket expense).
To offset the out-of-pocket expense, I created an acupuncture shared medical appointment (SAMA), which drops the price point down to $40 per visit.
Many patients seek acupuncture treatment in this shared appointment setting for the cost savings.
An acupuncturist would need to evaluate you to determine if you qualify for the shared appointment, so all first visit consultations must be done in a first visit appointment setting.
Common conditions we see in the SAMA setting include: hot flashes, pain (especially migraine, fibromyalgia, knee, ankle, etc.), allergy symptoms, side effects due to chemotherapy and radiation, and stress/anxiety/depression.
Our acupuncture team sees patients throughout the entire Cleveland Clinic health system: main campus, Lyndhurst, Broadview Heights, Strongsville and Avon.
The SAMA clinics are at Lyndhurst and Avon campuses only.
Would you know how I can get my insurance to pay for acupuncture treatments?
I will like to know how I can find an acupuncture doctor near the 45424 ZIP code and how can I check if they are certified?
You would have to call your insurance company directly to see if acupuncture is a covered benefit.
Sometimes, a letter of necessity provided by your doctor can be accepted by your insurance company to cover the cost.
Again, this conversation should be had directly with your insurance carrier.
You can go to theNational Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine's websiteto do a practitioner search by ZIP code.
I would then go to your state's medical board website to be sure the acupuncturist is indeed state licensed.
Word of mouth through trusted family/friends/physicians is the best way to go.
What are the qualifications for an individual experienced in the performance of acupuncture?
Training as an acupuncturist is a minimum graduate-level degree, minimum of three years of schooling, with 1905 hours of training.
Beyond the core curriculum, acupuncturists must maintain their medical degree by fulfilling continuing education credits throughout their entire career.
If you are interested in this curriculum, you may want to visitThe Accreditation Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine's websiteto search for accredited schools by state.
Is acupuncture available at the Weston Florida location?
Unfortunately, it is not available at this time, but it's being discussed.
Stay tuned!
