What is functional medicine?
A very basic question but I am not sure I know what it means.
Functional medicine (FM) addresses the underlying causes of disease using a systems-biology approach and emphasizes the therapeutic partnership between physician (provider) and patient.
FM shifts from the traditional disease-centered model of medicine to a more patient-centered approach, which addresses the whole person, not just an isolated set of symptoms.
There is an emphasis on health, wellness and vitality for each person.
Functional medicine physicians look at the interactions among genetic, environmental and lifestyle factors that can influence health and chronic disease.
It also emphasizes the individuality of each person and is at the cutting edge of personalized medicine.
Can a functional medicine approach help with dementia?
Would you give some insight and ways family members can help an affected person?
It may be helpful in assessing underlying genetic susceptibilities and triggers of an individual's development of dementia.
In some cases, treatment recommendations may improve functioning of an individual.
I would recommend the patient and family see a functional medicine provider in consultation for this problem.
Does a D.O.
(Doctorate of Osteopathic Medicine) fall under functional medicine?
Also, would you explain how the manipulations done to the skull, jaw and face help with TMJ and migraines?
Do they lessen or prevent?
A D.O. must go through an additional functional medicine certificate program to claim they use functional medicine in their practice.
The TMJ, neck, skull and shoulder work together as a unit.
When one dysfunctions, it will affect the other parts of the unit.
Migraines are understood as additional pressure in the skull that puts pressure onto the small vessels of the brain, causing pain.
When the skull is gently manipulated, it can relieve the pressure off of the vessels and possibly provide relief from the migraine.
Because the TMJ, neck, skull and shoulders work together, sometimes you can work on the neck and that will positively affect the pressure in the skull, leading to relief.
They are commonly seen together, but yes you can have one without the other.
Some things you should look for when assessing if you have some TMJ pain or discomfort are Can TMJ disorder cause pain at the base of the skull and neck and neuralgia in my face?
Yes.
They are called radicular pains.
That is when the pain is traveling away from the location of the dysfunction.
One way to see on your own if they are related is to press with firm pressure around the muscles where the TMJ is and see if that increases or decreases the symptoms you have listed.
Can activator chiropractic help TMJ?
Most chiropractic techniques help with TMJ.
But in addition to that, exercises are needed to strengthen and create symmetry so the joint works optimally.
Please explain some remedies that could be done by oneself when there is no functional medicine practice anywhere nearby.
How can you find a functional medicine practitioner?
Does your Cleveland Clinic Las Vegas location provide services of this sort?
There are many things that someone with migraines can start on their own.
The first is to keep a regular schedule.
It is important to go to bed and rise at the same time every day and get adequate sleep.
It is also important to eat regularly to keep blood sugar levels stable.
Inadequate sleep and irregular eating patterns are common triggers of migraine.
Certain foods can also be triggers, from foods that have bioactive amines, which dilate blood vessels, such as wine, aged cheese, bananas and avocado, to food intolerances such as gluten, dairy, egg, yeast, corn and soy.
I recommend eliminating foods from the diet for three to four weeks, then reintroducing them one at a time to assess the impact on your headaches.
Also, stress management techniques such as meditation, yoga and tai chi can be helpful.
What kind of underlying causes might you discover for migraines or TMJ?
There are many potential underlying causes of migraine, which include chemicals in our food that are neurotoxins such as MSG, NutraSweet and artificial flavors and colorings, or chemicals that dilate blood vessels such as aged cheese, wine and chocolate.
Food intolerances, stress, nutrient deficiencies and imbalances in cellular energy production are additional triggers of migraine in a genetically susceptible person.
I had different kinds of head pain in my life, including that provoked by high blood pressure.
With time, I learned how to recognize them and more or less how to treat them.
The most difficult pain to handle is the migraine pain.
Usually, I have migraine pain in the small side of my head, and it is difficult to continue my activities.
Sometimes, I can see an “aura.”
It’s best to go into a dark room and close everything if possible.
Several years ago, there was a big change in the medical treatment.
Could you inform as to what rest in the large use of people with less secondary effects?
Thanks a lot.
I am not clear on the question being asked, but there are many treatments of migraine that have few to no side effects, including therapeutic elimination diets, vitamins and mineral supplementation, stress management techniques, exercise, regular lifestyle habits related to sleep and eating regularly, acupuncture and massage therapy.
What do you recommend for those who are sensitive to changes in barometric pressure?
I have migraines and chronic headaches and have responded well to BOTOX injections and stress management.
You have a couple of options.
1- You could move to a desert climate where the pressure stays relatively the same.2- There are exercises, stretches or treatments that you could use on an as needed basis to help when the pressure changes.
Does caffeine play a role in headaches and migraines?
Yes, caffeine can play a significant role as a migraine trigger.
I recommend anyone who suffers from migraine avoid caffeine on a regular basis and then have the option to use it for acute treatment of headache, though it is important to remember not to overuse caffeine, as you can get rebound headaches from rebound dilation of blood vessels.
Can you talk about overuse of pain medications as a possible cause of migraines?
And what can be done about it?
Migraine sufferers can develop chronic daily headache from overuse of analgesic medications such as acetaminophen, ibuprofen and triptans.
Caffeine is included as well.
It is important to use these medications no more than two to three times weekly.
If you are having more frequent migraines, then a preventive medication or herbal medication is recommended.
I grind my teeth badly.
Are there any tools/aids to assist me in breaking the habit?
How much does the grinding contribute to my TMJ?
The TMJ muscles are what help you chew.
So, the grinding is coming from your TMJ muscles’ inability to relax.
To break the habit, you have to retrain the muscles and teach them how to relax.
It is hard to know what exercises you need because we have to customize the exercises for each person so the exercises target only the muscles that are dysfunctioning.
Dr. Bang or Dr. Young, you mentioned that teeth-grinding is the result of the TMJ muscles not being able to relax.
If I am grinding my teeth, would that correlate to other muscles in my body not relaxing also?
I see systemic (body-wide) impact on muscle tension related to chronic stress, chronic inflammation and magnesium deficiency.
I would ask your physician to check a RBC (red blood cell) magnesium level, which assesses cellular stores of magnesium and should be over 6.0.
Our soil in the US is very depleted of magnesium, so it can be difficult to get the RDA (smallest dose to prevent frank disease), even if you are eating a healthy diet.
I also see a lot of muscle tension and pain related to low-grade, chronic inflammation from a SAD (standard American diet) high in processed foods and sugar, which is depleted of nutrients.
It is important for everyone to follow a nutrient-dense, whole-food diet, assess for individual nutrient needs and manage stress to improve pain.
Over time, grinding your teeth will lead to TMJ joint destruction and pain.
If you are grinding your teeth and don't have pain yet, it is only a matter of time before the pain will come on.
If you let the grinding continue, major damage can be done to the joint.
What is the best way to use acupuncture with regard to migraines?
Is it only effective for relieving migraines once they start or can acupuncture help prevent migraines?
I am looking for alternative, non-medicinal therapies to help prevent migraines for my 11-year-old daughter.
Is there a recommended protocol for acupuncture for migraine prevention?
Her neurologist does not want her to do chiropractic work, but she is OK with acupuncture.
Acupuncture has been shown to be effective at both preventing migraines and in reducing the intensity and frequency of migraines.
In traditional Chinese medicine, each patient is assessed by history and physical exam, which guides the recommended treatment and protocol.
From of the information you have given me, you sound like a great candidate for chiropractic care.
There are many people in pain who have no x-ray or MRI findings, and that can be very frustrating, but you should look at it in a positive way.
Be grateful that you don’t have significant findings, because your pain would most likely be even worse than what you are experiencing now.
It sounds to me that there may be something in your daily life at home or work or with your sleep that is continuing to aggravate the neck and cause the recurrent headaches.
We will find out which activity is aggravating your neck, and retrain the neck, shoulder and head muscles so you can receive some longer-lasting relief.
I have just gone to a chiropractor for TMJ pain and underwent thermal imaging testing in preparation for my upcoming treatment.
I have now done some research on this technique and have found a lot of negative information, which has caused me to have second thoughts about this tool being used.
This is an example of the negative information: “Despite their lack of scientific support, colorful thermographic images are still used by many chiropractors as a tool for selling spinal adjustments, and some chiropractors offer free thermography as a screening device.
You should assume that any chiropractor who does this will find something that needs treatment.”
What are your feelings?
Thermography images can be helpful when using them as an extra tool along with other diagnostic tools.
If you perform a thermography on any person, you will see areas of the spine that could benefit from manipulation, manual therapy or exercise because we are dynamic humans.
I don't like when thermography is the only tool used to evaluate a person for treatment because there are so many variables to that technique.
I do like thermography when the chiropractor is using it to try and find the root of the problem and get the most specific area of need.
Concerning your TMJ pain, manual therapy and chiropractic is a proven, excellent treatment as well as minimally invasive.
It should be one of the first therapies tried before others are sought out.
More information is needed to know what imaging, if any, would be needed.
X-rays are used to see the bones and bone alignment clearly.
MRI is used when the muscles and soft tissue needs to be seen.
After a physical exam, your physician will know if you need imaging because oftentimes you won’t.
I had a closed lock TMJ situation for about five months and had surgery to remove an adhesion.
Now my TMJ is constantly sore and stiff, and the more I try to loosen it up, the more headaches I get.
Muscle relaxers don't work and I hate being on pain medications.
How can I get past this with a long-term solution?
Just like you would go through rehabilitation therapy for a hip or knee replacement, you need to do some rehab therapy for the TMJ surgery.
In my office, we not only work on the TMJ pain but teach you how to perform home care and exercises that can really help.
If you are returning to the chiropractor for mid- and low-back pain, you are definitely safe to go.
The type of vertigo you have will dictate if you should use chiropractic manipulation in the neck.
Understand that there are very gentle chiropractic techniques that could be used if you feel uncomfortable with manipulation.
In some vertigo cases, manipulation is the best treatment option.
What are some complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) treatments that can be used to treat migraines, TMJ?
CAM modalities can be very helpful in the treatment of migraines and TMJ.
It is helpful to initially see an integrative or functional medicine physician who can guide you to therapies that would be most useful to you, but self-referral is an option.
I have seen benefit in the scientific literature and clinically from the use of acupuncture and Chinese herbs, massage therapy, manual therapies such as chiropractic and osteopathy, diet, supplements and botanicals, stress management techniques, as well biofeedback and neurofeedback.
You already answered my TMJ question, but only if you have time I thought I would add this question.
I have also been diagnosed with what the neurologist "believes" to be a tension headache due to years of chronic stress that I have had for 20 years.
I am off work again because of it.
I have had my tonsils and adenoids out, had acupuncture, neurofeedback, electrical impulses attached to my head, seen several massage and physiotherapists, MRI, CT scans and seen many doctors including two neurologists, oral surgeons, and have purchased three different dental appliances for TMJ and sleep apnea.
And still I have the constant ache from my jaw over my ears and down the back and sides of my neck.
I have pretty much given up hope.
Am I expecting too much by hoping that a chiropractor could help?
Don't give up.
Keep searching.
There are so many different types of therapies and providers out there.
Try chiropractic.
That might be the key technique you need.
Thanks.
Keep looking for solutions to your health.
Remember you are your body’s best physician.
