How can I make my family’s favorite traditional recipes healthier?
There are so many ways to makeover a recipe to improve its nutritional value.
For example, try using plain, fat-free Greek yogurt or fat-free sour cream instead of regular sour cream, using skim milk instead of whole milk and using reduced sodium, fat-free broth/soup instead of regular broth/soup.
Do you have any healthy holiday appetizer ideas?
A veggie plate with hummus, shrimp cocktail or fruit with Greek yogurt dip make delicious, easy and healthy holiday appetizers.
What can I use as a replacement for light corn syrup in my holiday recipes?
That is the same thing as high fructose corn syrup, right?
Corn syrup and high fructose corn syrup are actually two different things.
High fructose corn syrup has a higher ratio of fructose vs glucose than other types of sugar.
Research on high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) suggests a possible link between increased HFCS intake and increased risk for metabolic disorders (obesity, diabetes, etc.), but this research is not yet conclusive.Substitutions for light corn syrup depend mostly on what food is being made.
Most replacements are just other sugar sources.
For this reason, I would simply recommend careful portion control and moderation for recipes using this ingredient.
My doctor says I should watch my sodium.
Besides keeping the salt shaker off the table, what else do I need to do to limit my salt intake during the holidays?
Limit the processed foods!
About 77 percent of the sodium in the typical American diet comes from processed, convenience and restaurant foods, not the salt shaker.
For homemade holiday meals, avoid boxed mixes and canned foods.
Strive to make as much from scratch as possible – stuffing, gravy, mashed potatoes, green bean casserole, etc. – and, of course, put that salt shaker away.
If I save up my calories by skipping meals and snacks throughout the day, can I eat whatever I want at holiday parties to balance things out?
I don’t recommend skipping meals before holiday parties or meals.
Under-eating in the hours leading up to a social eating event typically leads to overeating at that event – not to mention the discomfort and irritability skipping meals can bring.
Instead, consider having small, sensible meals and snacks in the hours leading up to the event.
Include a protein and fiber source regularly throughout the day to avoid losing your sense of control at holiday events.
What are some tips for making better choices at all these holiday parties?
Bring a healthy dish to share, such as a fruit plate or a colorful salad.
This will ensure there is at least one dish at the party you can use to fill up half of your plate.
Chances are, the other party guests will be thankful to see some healthier options. .
Scope out the table at the start of the meal and decide which dishes are your very favorites.
For example, if you don’t think of bread as vital to your overall enjoyment of your holiday meal, then skip the roll and save at least 100 calories.
Or, if the rolls are a must-have, then try leaving the crust to your slice of pie (or leave off the whipped cream) as an alternate way to save 100 calories.
Little omissions like these can add up easily without feeling like you’re sacrificing anything at all.
If you love mashed potatoes, stuffing and yams, don’t have full servings of all three.
Instead, take just a few tablespoons of each.
The calories saved will be significant, but you’ll still get to enjoy all the foods you’ve waited for all year.
Other techniques to control portions are to use smaller plates and stick to only one plate of food.
If you love pumpkin pie, serve yourself a modest portion, avoid distractions and enjoy every bite.
So often, our excitement of the day keeps us from being able to fully appreciate the taste of an extravagant dish.
By taking a moment and tuning in to the dish, you will not only enjoy the food more, but you will also feel more satisfied with a small portion.
How can I stay away from the sweets?
I love them!
Making cookies does not help, but the holiday is a must for cookies.
I have noticed that I make so much fudge sauce to give away that I no longer go berserk over it, but how can I stay away from the cookies?
I'm guessing you are not making all of these cookies just for yourself, in which case, it is all about planning.
Once you make those holiday cookies, portion them into opaque containers, such as tins.
Immediately designate where each tin is destined to go – family, friends, neighbors, work, specific holiday parties or events, and, finally, the ones that will stay in your own home.
Clarifying the fate of every tin will make it easier to avoid uncontrolled snacking on those baked goods.
Then, give them away as soon as you can!
Is it true that you can be addicted to sugar?
Sugar can have an addictive quality to it, absolutely.
The main issue involves sugar's effect on blood glucose levels and the insulin response.
Specifically, when people eat refined grains or sugary drinks, that food rapidly breaks down into sugar in the body and goes into the bloodstream, quickly elevating blood sugar.
The insulin response then kicks in to help bring that blood sugar back down to normal levels.
Unfortunately, this insulin response stimulates appetite, and guess what kind of food your body will be craving?
That's right: sugar.
In this way, sugar can be "addictive."
How truly dangerous are artificial sweeteners?
Despite all the media hype, current research supports that sugar itself is more dangerous to humans than artificial sweeteners.
At this time, we do not see any negative physical health effects of artificial sweeteners for humans, if consumed in moderation.
The American Institute for Cancer Research has a top 10 list of recommendations to decrease risk of cancer.
Avoiding sugary beverages is included on that list, while artificial sweeteners are not mentioned at all.
In addition, sugar (regardless of its form – sugar, brown sugar, high fructose corn syrup, molasses, honey, etc.) is known to directly elevate blood sugar levels.
For any person with diabetes, pre-diabetes or any type of insulin resistance, artificial sweeteners would be a better choice than regular sugar for this reason.
Sugar also has calories while artificial sweeteners have negligible calories, meaning sugar intake can lead to weight gain while artificial sweeteners do not directly provide excess calories that can lead to weight gain.
That being said, both sugar and artificial sweeteners are known to stimulate appetite.
For this reason, I always recommend everyone try to limit their intake of sweetened foods/beverages overall, regardless of method of sweetening.
What about using agave or honey as a substitute sweetener?
Is it just as bad?
Agave nectar and honey both contain just as much sugar as regular sugar.
It is true that agave nectar has a lower glycemic index than most other sugar sources, and that real honey contains some antioxidants; however, they still provide just as many calories and grams of sugar as regular sugar.
For that reason, I still recommend avoiding overuse of any sugar source, including agave nectar or honey.
Are there any foods I should stay away from completely or eat in moderation?
Sugary drinks really don't have much of a place in a healthy diet, especially things like soda, sweet tea or other sweetened beverages.
I recommend avoiding these types of drinks as much as possible.
I feel like the holidays are a non-stop rush for me – shopping, wrapping, cleaning, cooking and baking, and decorating.
What are some examples of healthy snacks I can choose during the holiday season?
Focus on minimally processed, protein- and fiber-rich foods for snacks.
Try nuts and dried fruit (no sugar added, of course), roasted garbanzo beans, string cheese and fruit, Greek yogurt with bran or whole-grain cereal, pumpkin seeds, cottage cheese and fruit, raw veggies with hummus, or apples with natural peanut butter to keep you fueled between meals.
What holiday foods are better to binge on, and which ones should I try to avoid?
The concept of binging itself is not a pleasant one.
It is the act of eating excessively and uncontrollably to the extent that the body experiences negative after-effects.
Instead of losing all sense of moderation and control, consider using strategies to help manage portion sizes in a way that supports overall health.
Focus on eating nutrient-dense foods – foods that contain lots of nutrients for very few calories, such as vegetables, fruits, beans/lentils, whole grains, lean protein and fat-free dairy – and limiting calorie-dense foods – foods that contain lots of calories but very few nutrients, such as candied yams, instant mashed potatoes with butter and gravy, macaroni and cheese, desserts and rolls made with refined grains.
How much does binging for the big meals actually hurt you?
Any way I can get a free pass for these holiday meals?
Ignoring the effects of overeating doesn’t mean health consequences don’t occur.
Even one day of overeating can lead to indigestion, acid reflux, mild weight gain, fluid retention, high blood sugars or other undesirable issues.
Keeping your health in consideration, even on special events or holidays, is part of the requirements to enjoy the rewards of being a healthy person.
What are the best options for holiday alcoholic drinks?
If you do choose to drink alcohol during the holidays, focus on sticking to proper portion size.
A small glass of wine (5 oz.) can be a satisfying complement to a holiday meal without sacrificing excessive calories.
My wife is trying to lose weight.
How can I support her during the holidays without feeling like I’m on a diet myself?
First of all, I’d like to commend you for being so supportive of her desire to improve her health.
Here are some tips to help both of you enjoy the holidays I seem to gain weight every year during the holidays, but I swear I keep my portions in check at holiday dinners.
Why do I keep gaining weight?
There are many possible reasons for your weight gain.
First of all, even if portions are small, having special holiday foods in the home over several days and weeks can definitely lead to excess calorie intake over time.
Remember, it’s a holiday, not a holi-week or holi-month.
Make sure to keep leftovers out of the home after special meals.
Try sending things home with guests, or avoid taking leftovers home yourself if you are the guest.
Be especially wary of sweets and baked goods.
These pack a lot of calories into very small volumes.
A few cookies can easily add up to hundreds of calories.
Over time, those small portions can lead to a few pounds each year.
After gorging during a Thanksgiving feast, can I just exercise a lot the next day to work off the calories?
It’s true that exercise can help negate some of the unhealthful consequences of overeating, such as weight gain.
However, a typical holiday meal with only one serving (no seconds) can have over 2,200 calories – and this is not including drinks, appetizers or desserts.
It would take about four hours of non-stop walking (around 3 mph pace) to burn 2,200 calories.
As you can see, this may not be a realistic plan to balance out over-eating during the holidays.
If I don't exceed my "weight maintenance" caloric intake for the day, can I eat anything I want during the holidays?
Indiscretion while making dietary choices can have far more health consequences than just weight gain, such as effects on cholesterol, blood sugars, blood pressure and digestion.
These sorts of consequences can’t be directly “exercised away” in the same way that calorie intake can be balanced through physical activity (although it can help).
For this reason, it’s important to remember that the nutritional quality of a meal goes beyond simply calorie-counting.
My husband always says that he needs a big breakfast on Thanksgiving morning to stretch out his stomach to make room for dinner.
Isn't that a bunch of hogwash?
The human stomach is actually only the size of a human fist.
For this reason, the stomach is meant to be able to stretch slightly to accommodate food intake.
Following digestion, the stomach returns to its normal size.
In other words, there is no reason to try to "stretch out" the stomach in the time leading up to a highly-anticipated meal.
I would also recommend your husband consider reading the Q&A above regarding binging at holiday meals.
I hope these nutrition tips help guide you in making healthy choices this holiday season.
Although holiday foods are an enjoyable part of this time of year, remember to focus on what the holidays are really about – tradition, family, friends and celebrating the joy of the season with your loved ones.
Happy holidays!
