Is there a cure for sciatica pain?
Most people who have an acute episode of sciatica will recover.
Chronic pain is more difficult and may require significant lifestyle changes, medical and procedural treatments as well as appropriate and ongoing exercise.
Sometimes, psychological treatment is helpful in managing chronic sciatica.
Some mornings I get out of bed and almost can't straighten up.
What to do?
Consider stretching prior to going to bed and discuss with your doctor medications that may assist with the morning pain/stiffness.
As appropriate, exercises to strengthen your back muscles will help over time.
I've been diagnosed as having a "herniated disk" (L4).
My question: Are a herniated disk and a slipped disking the same, and does a herniated/slipped disk heal over time?
Also, how does degenerative disk disease fit into the first question, and what conservative treatment options (other than surgery) would be recommended?
Slipped disc and herniated disc are really the same and are used to describe types of disc degeneration.
These are diagnosed by radiology imaging (MRI or CT with contrast).
There are different grades and descriptions ranging from disc bulge, herniation and extrusion.
The description does not always correlate with symptoms.
Yes, there is a chance for healing.
Remaining as active as tolerated and using mild, non-narcotic pain medications can help.
Some people respond to physical therapy.
Lastly, epidural steroid injections can sometimes decrease the pain temporarily to facilitate physical therapy.
What are your thoughts on tension myositis syndrome (TMS)?
Could tension, stress and anxiety be the cause of back pain and issues if nothing mechanical is found wrong?
Yes, tension, stress and anxiety can cause or increase back pain and many other pain conditions.
This can occur with or without mechanical issues.
For lower back pain, what is the recommended protocol with respect to the sequence of medical appointments?
Should the first visit be with an internist, a neurologist, an orthopedic specialist or whom?
Internist first then pain specialist (I may be biased here!).
A neurologist and/or spine surgeon (orthopaedic or neurosurgeon) can be accessed as needed.
Can weakness in the legs be caused by a herniated disk?
Absolutely.
Acute disc herniation resulting in weak legs may be due to a single or multiple root compressions from a herniated disc causing unilateral leg weakness, such as a foot drop for example.
Bilateral leg weakness and/or bowel and bladder disturbance may be caused by a large central disc herniation resulting in cauda equina syndrome.
An MRI of your spine should detect any other serious conditions in the spine that may cause pain, such as a tumor or vascular malformation.
Could a severe, sharp lower back pain indicate nerve damage or a torn muscle, ligament or tendon?
I am having trouble getting this diagnosed.
Severe, sharp, lower back pain can be indicative of several things.
It can be due to a pinched nerve from a ruptured disc, a muscle spasm, fracture, or a torn muscle or ligament.
I've already had therapy and it is not working.
Currently, epidurals are the only thing relieving pain.
I have a pacemaker so an MRI is not possible.
If more studies are necessary, a CT myelogram will help.
How can you differentiate between bone pain and muscular pain?
Sometimes it's hard to differentiate between them.
We get a clue by your history, physical examination and supportive imaging.
I can't have a myelogram because I am allergic to contrast dye.
If you can't have an MRI, then a plain CT is the only other option.
What treatment recommendations would you make for someone with spinal stenosis who has tried multiple epidural injections and only receives relief for a few weeks at a time?
It largely depends on your symptoms.
If you are experiencing something called neurogenic claudication, which is characterized by progressive aching, weakness and pain in the back or legs when you walk, and you have MRI evidence of lumbar stenosis, a lumbar decompressive surgery (laminectomy) may benefit you greatly.
The surgery is typically well tolerated and requires a one- to two-day hospital stay postoperatively.
The surgery usually brings near immediate relief of your symptoms.
If you meet these criteria, I recommend an evaluation with a spine surgeon to determine if you are a surgical candidate.
I have been dealing with chronic back pain for 11 months.
It started as a burning sensation on the side of my lower leg.
It has progressed to constant pain across my lower back and down my right leg, but can at times be on both sides.
It presents itself as sciatica.
MRI did not show anything significant.
An orthopedic doctor said there was not anything else he could do.
I have had two rounds of oral steroids and a steroid shot in the hip.
I have tried a chiropractor a few times, had six visits to an acupuncturist, physical therapy, a nerve conduction study and a CT myelogram.
I have been given muscle relaxers and nerve medicine (Neurontin).
I am now seeing a physiatrist who has given me a steroid shot in the piriformis muscle that had no effect, and two weeks ago, I had an epidural shot.
It has not done anything.
At this point, I don't have any reason to believe more epidural steroid injections will help.
I have a follow up appointment this Thursday.
I am wondering if I need some kind of non-invasive procedure to actually get in there and make room for this pinched nerve (it is between L4 and L5).
At this time, it is a good idea to be evaluated by a spine surgeon.
You have tried several conservative modalities with no relief, and you have evidence of neural compression that may be amenable to surgery.
It is essential to bring an MRI or a CT myelogram with you to your appointment, as a spinal surgeon can analyze the findings and determine if you are a surgical candidate.
Is it better to wait as long as you can to get any surgery if that is what is indicated, as the procedures may improve with time?
It is highly advisable to wait as long as you can before having spine surgery.
This isn't because of more advanced procedures, however, it is because of your symptoms.
You should wait to have spine surgery until the symptoms are so bad that you cannot stand it anymore.
I cannot sit for more than 10 minutes without the lower back pain starting.
Five of my discs on the left side have herniated.
I am 80 years old and need some relief.
The steroid injections did not work, and I try to get along on one 50mg tramadol.
What else can I do?
What can I take for headache safely since I am on the tramadol?
If you have not yet had an MRI of the lumbar spine, I recommend obtaining either an MRI or CT myelogram of the lumbar spine and consultation with a spine surgeon.
I would recommend an MRI of the lumbar spine and consultation with a spine surgeon.
If you have not had physical therapy, I would recommend this as well.
Over the last seven years, I have tried physical therapy for herniated discs along with tramadol.
I tried epidural steroid injections last week using x rays.
Tramadol helps, the injections did not.
The therapy helps if used in very small time frame.
Going for an hour of therapy leaves me unable to get up and walk for days (I am 80 years old).
Is there such a thing a 15- or 20-minute therapy?
I try to do the therapy on my own for about 10 minutes a day now.
I was told not to have a back operation since I have five different discs in the lower back, which makes it too confusing.
Depending on the symptoms you are experiencing, surgery may be a possibility.
It might benefit you to obtain a consultation with a spine surgeon if alternative therapies are not working for at this time.
Thanks for your answer, Dr. Francis.
I failed to mention that I have seen a neurologist and have had nerve conduction studies, and there is no significant neuropathy.
I have had an MRI and a myelogram.
The pain does not radiate, but is localized in my lower back.
Is there anything more you can tell me with this additional information?
The low back pain you’re experiencing may be a result of the deformity in your back.
You might be a candidate for fusion surgery.
I recommend consultation with a spine surgeon for a full workup.
I have had an MRI and have seen a spine surgeon.
He recommended the transforaminal epidural steroids, which were given by a pain specialist doctor.
This did not help.
Should I see a different spine surgeon?
No.
I would return to your existing spine surgeon and explain that the shots did not help.
If he or she does not wish to perform surgery, then you are welcome to seek a second (or third) opinion.
For 11 years now, I have suffered donor site pain of the iliac crest resulting from a spinal fusion at L-5, with no relief from oxycodone to stims to epidurals.
It is a 24/7 stabbing pain.
Has Cleveland Clinic ever successfully treated "donor site pain," this particular pain problem?
If the chronic pain is due to a nerve injury, then you may respond to a radiofrequency ablation (RFA) procedure.
I have a history of a 2009 back surgery.
Recent chronic pain and a subsequent CT scan of my lumbar spine indicates L1-L2 posterior osteophytes, chronic bulge and moderate bilateral neural foramen narrowing.
There are moderate to severe degenerative changes, especially at the L1-L2 and L3-L4 discs.
The prior surgery was on L4-L5: pedicles screws transfixed L4-L5, transfixing the grade 1 anterolisthesis of L4-L5.
My pain currently is managed with epidural injections.
A recent fall aggravated the S-1 L-5 area.
Is therapy really a very likely or viable treatment given the above?
At the outset, I would recommend evaluation with pain management and physical therapy, as this can definitely help you overcome your pain related to the recent fall and your current situation.
If this fails to help you, I recommend repeating the lumbar MRI and seeking evaluation with a spine surgeon.
Depending on your overall medical and surgical history, the spinal injection my assist with reducing the severity of your pain as part of a comprehensive pain management strategy.
What kind of injections are available for pain, and are they limited in that they only help for a while?
That is, you may experience relief the first three times you have the injection, but then they don't seem to work anymore.
There are many different injections for pain including nerve blocks, spinal injections and radio frequency ablation (RFA).
The choice of the injection depends on your pain.
Most last for a short period, from days to months.
The role for the injections is to either confirm the diagnosis or to temporarily decrease the pain while the patient does other things (physical therapy, medication management and time).
If the injections seem to stop working, the mechanism for the pain may need to be reevaluated.
The pain may be coming from a different area.
My doctor tells me he can find nothing in my back x-ray to explain my mid-back pain and muscle spasms.
Would a cortisone injection in my spine be helpful, and how safe are they?
What are the side effects?
I think you need to see a pain specialist who would make recommendations based on your symptoms, examination and appropriate imaging.
You may not need spine steroid injections.
With the current move away from the use of narcotics for pain control, how is long-term pain to be addressed in a meaningful way?
There are many options for long-term management of pain.
There is no evidence that narcotics really help most patients, and they are associated with significant side effects.
I have chronic lumbar spinal stenosis with moderate to severe pain.
Will gabapentin help?
I can only walk about a half block before the pain gets severe, so I haven't been exercising all winter.
Is there any help?
Will gabapentin help severe pain from lumbar spinal stenosis and in what dosage?
Gabapentin can help; however, the dosage depends on many factors.
I would also have you consider a spine surgery opinion after you try conservative therapy (medications, physical therapy as appropriate).
A pain specialist would be able to evaluate you and recommend a treatment plan that is appropriate for your pain and health status.
With respect to long-term pain management, can you elaborate on some of the alternative new options that are to replace narcotics.
Also, have you ever considered medical marijuana for pain management?
The options to replace narcotics aren't really new.
Medical marijuana is still controversial, and the studies for its use are preliminary.
There is a lot of anecdotal experience, but not enough evidence yet for most mainstream clinicians to feel comfortable prescribing it.
That was not true in my case.
Fentanyl was helpful, as were the Lidoderm® patches, but both of these have been removed from the Medicare prescription list as of January 1.
I was injured in a rear-ended collision on a freeway one night, have had several series of injections and fusion of four lumbar levels.
The pain is decreased, but remains a problem.
A four-level lumbar fusion is a big surgery.
It is not uncommon to still experience pain long after the surgery.
Depending on when the surgery was done, further x-rays may be indicated to ensure that you’re healing properly.
I would consult with the surgeon who performed the surgery originally, or a new surgeon if that surgeon is currently unavailable.
I have had chronic back pain for 11 months that presents itself as sciatica or a pinched nerve, with pain going down my right leg.
I have had x-rays, an MRI, steroids/steroid shots, physical therapy, chiropractic treatment, acupuncture, a CT myelogram and a nerve conduction study.
I have a healthy spine, allegedly no pinched nerves, no cancer, arthritis or reason to have this constant pain.
The doctor gave me Neurontin to try.
(I have already done muscle relaxers and steroids.)
He is done with me and has nothing else to offer.
I am wondering what to do now.
I recommend that you get a second opinion from a pain management specialist.
Your pain may not be coming from the back, and other reasons for the pain need to be evaluated.
For example, spasm of a muscle in the buttock called the piriformis muscle may mimic sciatica.
This can absolutely be attributable to hip pain, as hip pain due to arthritis or bursitis can oftentimes mimic back pain or sciatica.
It is especially concerning if you have pain in your hip on movement of your leg or pain when you press on this side of your hip.
If this is the case, it would be prudent to seek a consult with an orthopedic surgeon who specializes in hips.
Back pain can be caused from heart problems, correct?
If so, how do you know it is heart versus other forms of back pain?
Heart problems and concerns related to the aorta, which is the large artery coming from the heart, can sometimes refer pain to the upper back.
This is evaluated by your physicians from your pain history, medical and surgical history as well as your physical examination and imaging.
If an epidural injection helped, this is a good sign.
This indicates that nerve root impingement is the source of at least a great deal of your current symptoms.
Radiofrequency ablation is a good procedure and does help considerably.
However, with a known lumbar deformity such as spondylolisthesis, you may want to consider surgical intervention as well.
I have systemic sarcoidosis and have multiple enhancing cervical lesions along with hypo and hyper intense lesions in T12, L2, L4 and L5, along with the bilateral sacrum and posterior iliac bones.
There are no lytic or sclerotic osseous lesions, and there is no stenosis (per MRI).
I have pain in the thoracic and lumbar areas.
I am unable to walk or stand for long periods without severe pain.
I had facet injection by a spine doctor with no improvement.
I have also had bilateral SI injections (three times) from a pain doctor with minimal lumbar improvement, although it did help with pain radiating down my legs.
I have been on prednisone (I just stopped) and am currently on Humira®, gabapentin (SFN) and Flexeril® to try to get some sleep.
My rheumatologist wants a biopsy, but the CT doesn't show a good spot.
I have been trying to walk in a pool to get some exercise when tolerated.
I have oxycodone for extremely bad days but rarely use it, as it barely takes the edge off and I don't want to get used to taking it.
Do you have any suggestions for pain relief?
Thanks so much.
I recommend a second opinion regarding options for your pain.
You may need to review multiple modalities to manage the different locations and components of your pain.
I applaud your efforts to minimize medications and to be as active as tolerated.
Partnering with the right team (your rheumatologist, physical therapy, an interventional pain specialist who would consider spinal implant therapy as appropriate and psychology) may help.
I have multiple bone lesions in the marrow.
My last MRI showed them to be increasing in size and extent.
Also, they are more confluent appearing.
The facility I go to said the CT didn't show well enough to do a biopsy.
When I went to Cleveland Clinic, they couldn't understand why they can’t do one.
Does it vary from facility to facility?
Since I already have a sarcoidosis diagnosis, they are assuming it is sarcoid but not positive.
All my nodules and lesions are atypical for sarcoid.
The only biopsy I've had was a parotid tumor that showed positive for sarcoidosis.
Nothing is helping with pain.
I’m just being told it’s from lesions.
Do you have any suggestions?
If the bony lesions result in compression fractures of the spine, kyphoplasty may provide some relief.
This involves inserting cement into the bones through a needle.
This is only effective in cases of compression fractures, not in cases of bony lesions without fracture.
I have degenerative disc disease in my lower back combined with mild scoliosis, and have been in pain now for over two years.
I had facet injections on the left, which helped for about two to three months.
Does it make sense that it is worse when I have to stand or walk for long periods of time?
Your pain description makes sense and may be associated with the mechanics of your spine and some muscle spasm.
I have been diagnosed with lumbar spondylolisthesis, worn disks between several lumbar vertebrae, stenosis and arthritis.
The pain is managed adequately with a moderate dose of ibuprofen and with exercises I was taught during physical therapy some years ago.
I was told by my orthopedist that surgery isn't necessary and that the two vertebrae where the slippage is are likely to autofuse because the disk is gone.
I've had problems with my toes getting cold even at indoor temperatures for about 15 years, and this has gotten worse.
For about three years, they have also been numb, which also appears to have progressed.
I recently had a fusion and corpectomy on my cervical spine, which relieved numbness in my fingers, weakness in my arms, tingling throughout my body and an awkward gait, but had no effect on my toes.
Could those symptoms be related to my spondylolisthesis or stenosis of my lumbar spine?
If so, what would be the treatment?
It is important to distinguish between small nerve disease, such as peripheral neuropathy, and large fiber disease, for example, from a compressed nerve due to spondylolisthesis.
If the numbness and sensation changes are localized to the feet, this is more likely to be the result of peripheral neuropathy, which is managed medically.
If the pain radiates down the legs and feet or is in the back and buttocks as well, this may be a symptom related to spondylolisthesis and stenosis.
It might benefit you to obtain an MRI of your lumbar spine and seek consultation with a spine surgeon in order to be fully examined and have a recommendation either for surgery or consultation with a neurologist.
Are there any new/promising treatments that help promote healing, not just mask pain, for lower back pain due to degenerated discs? www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2014/03/140308094811.htm - Is this working on humans?www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2587664/ - How about this?I'm a very active 53-year-old woman in constant pain.
I want to remain very active.
Low back pain due to degenerated discs is very difficult to treat.
The main issue is trying to pinpoint what exactly the pain generator is in patients, and it can vary from patient to patient.
For instance, patients with mechanical back pain experience a deep throbbing, agonizing low back pain that is worsened with activity and relieved with rest.
The patients typically have one or more degenerated discs with arthritic changes in the surrounding bone, and these patients typically respond well to lumbar fusion procedures.
Other patients have non-typical back pain, burning sensations, sharp sensations or pain in other parts of the body as well.
These patient's typically respond poorly to lumbar fusions.
There is a lot of advertising locally in Florida regarding a procedure called VAX-D.
Apparently, it involves lying on a split table and mechanically stretching the spine.
Several chiropractors offer it as a procedure to try for back pain.
Is there any data to support their claims of re-infusing the discs with blood and O2?
There is no data to support injecting the discs with blood and oxygen.
As a matter of fact, this may be harmful and potentially dangerous.
Discs in and of themselves do not receive direct blood supply.
They receive nutrients passively from the surrounding endplates of bone.
Injecting blood artificially into the discs will likely precipitate disc degeneration and worsen your condition.
