Let's begin with the questions.....
Am I, a 70-year-old man who wears contact lenses for astigmatism, a candidate for LASIK vision correction.
Would I still need reading glasses?
We have completed successful surgeries on 70+ year olds.
If you qualify we perform mono-vision surgery which is one eye for near and one eye for far.
This should help not needing reading glasses in most cases.
Can Presbyopia be successfully corrected today?
Thanks.
Yes, monovision can be targeted to give both distance and reading vision.
Can Lasik vision correction be done along with cataract removal surgery?
Are there disadvantages to combining the two?
Cataract surgery is a form of vision correction, so if you need cataract surgery, LASIK may not be necessary.
What is the difference between LASIK and PRK?
Lasik is where you make a flap and then perform the treatment on the eye and the flap is laid back.
Some people who do not qualify for Lasik due to thin corneas or being too flat or steep, might qualify for PRK.
They slough off the cells of your eye and perform the same correction after.
The difference with PRK is that you will have a slower healing time as well as a little more irritation.
The long tem outcome is the same.
If you happen to have a small swellings on your eyelids that causes you have headache, what could possibly be the cause?
Small swellings may need to be evaluated to see the nature of your ocular surface, and then factored in to see why the headaches.
Is there an age limit to have this surgery?
From 18 years to any age, but one must make sure there are no cataracts.
For my glasses, my reading is bad and distance is barely bad - plus there is an astigmatism.
I have tried contacts but the reading strength blurs the distance.
I have tried monovision and my brain cannot make the adjustment to using the eyes separately for reading/distance.
Then again - I only last maybe an hour.
If I cannot tolerate monovision - does that also eliminate laser correction surgery options?
We can personally evaluate how you might do with various monovision scenarios or you could just consider vision for distance in both eyes, and wear just reading glasses.
How long is this surgery?
Once you are in the laser room, the procedure is done in about 1/2 hour.
Is presbyopia corrected effectively and safely today?2) Myopia corrected in past 25 years can have negative results for eye function and sight.
Thanks in advance.
Presbyopia is most effectively treated with monovision LASIK today.
Other options, such as corneal inlays may be considered outside the United States.
Can both eyes be done at the same time or do I need two different appointments?
Typically, both eyes are done at the same time, but if someone wishes, it can be done sequentially.
What is the recovery timeframe?
For Lasik, it's normally you go rest the day of surgery and go back to work the next day as long as you do not have a job that you will take a chance of bumping or rubbing your eyes.
PRK you would have two to three days to get back to what you normally do.
Any time after 18 years of age is approved for Lasik surgery, however we would like to see three years of stable vision from 18 to 20 years old.
With the age of your child it should not be a problem performing the surgery.
Just about everyone in their 40's and 50's will need reading glasses but they can come back to get one eye corrected for reading later in life.
Do you have to have a certain prescription to be a candidate?
A good candidate needs to have 3 things1) Proper range of prescription, central corneal thickness and proper corneal shape2) Healthy eyes3) Motivation greater than anxiety in having the procedure What is the cost and what is included in that?
For PRK it is $4550.00 and Lasik is $4950.00 for both eyes, which includes all pre-op and post-op appointments, surgery kit including drops and enhancements for one year if needed.
I had PRK back in 1991 and am pleased with the outcome over the last 24 years.
When the procedure was performed, the doctor slightly over corrected one eye and slightly under corrected the other.
Now in my 50s, I am not comfortable with reading glasses because of the difference in prescription between the two eyes.
Is it typical these days to correct the eyes to a different prescription such as occurred with my procedure?
Yes, this is called monovision or blended vision, and is the most acceptable way for patient to maintain both reading and distance vision.
I’ve heard about bladeless LASIK, do you offer that and is it better than regular LASIK?
Bladeless refers to not using a blade to make the flap.
At Cleveland Clinic we have gone bladeless years ago and would never use a blade.
Some facilities may still use a blade just to keep the cost down but it is not top technology.
How long does it last once you have the surgery?
Are touch ups needed?
This is a permanent change to your eyes.
Normally only about 5% of the people need an enhancement however when you reach the age of 40 and beyond all people lose their close up vision.
When that happens you can wear glasses or one contact in one eye to correct the reading or come back in to have the one eye enhanced.
Normally the distance eye does not change but usually can be enhanced if it does.
What kind of pain is expected after the procedure and for how long?
Lasik is relatively painless.
You go home, take a nap for a few hours and when you wake up you really feel nothing.
PRK would display some pain and irritation usually around the third day but only lasts a short time as you heal.
