I am interested in quick breakfast menu ideas, and quick and easy snacks for during the day.
Also, is carb counting the best way to manage my Type 2 diabetes?
Let’s start with your last question first.
Learning how to count carbohydrates or using another meal planning approach to quantify carbohydrate intake can help to "match" mealtime insulin to carbohydrates that you eat.
Those on a fixed insulin plan or on insulin secretagogues (pills that stimulate your body to release insulin) will benefit from eating about the same amount of carbohydrate at meals and snacks and not skipping meals.
Breakfast and snack ideas will depend upon your tastes, and, as you said, the time in which you want to put into them.
Some breakfast choices include peanut butter on whole grain toast or waffles, cottage cheese and fruit, oatmeal sprinkled with nuts, Greek yogurt with whole grain cereal sprinkled on top, and a meal replacement shake.
Snacks choices may depend on your calorie needs and how long it will be before your next meal.
Some ideas include fruit, peanut butter on whole grain crackers, whole grain tortilla chips with salsa, vegetables with hummus dip, yogurt or a half sandwich.
The American Diabetes Association (diabetes.org) has many resources for meal planning.
Most of their books are also available through the local library system.
What kind of snacks are good, especially in the evening, for people with Type 2 diabetes.
My husband has no colon and has had blockages, so he won't eat raw vegetables or apples, or much salad out of concern for causing a blockage.
If he does eat those foods, they have to be cut very fine, and then he is still very cautious.
To further complicate matters, I am allergic to peanuts, an airborne allergy, so he can't eat peanut-based foods when I am around.
It sounds like you and your husband would benefit from a visit to a registered dietitian to help with the multiple food issues you face.
In general, chew all foods until they’re an applesauce-like consistency, and avoid any foods that your doctor told you to avoid or have caused problems in the past.
Depending on his calorie needs, snacks may include a variety of foods.
Some lower-fiber ones include: canned fruit (packed in juice, water or labeled 'lite') with cottage cheese or plain yogurt, a small serving of cereal with milk, toast with walnut or almond butter, a half sandwich or lite yogurt.
What are some snacks to eat if you have Type 2 diabetes and kidney stones.
Nuts are great for diabetes but not for kidney stones.
Do you have any suggestions?
Staying hydrated on no-calorie beverages is one of the better ways to prevent kidney stones.
For snacks, it might depend on the time of day and how hungry you are.
Some suggestions are fruit, yogurt, cheese and crackers, vegetables, a half sandwich and popcorn (as well as some of the items I've mentioned earlier).
Are Splenda and Truvia acceptable sugar substitutes?
Is it true that your body reacts to foods and drinks made with artificial sweeteners in a way that creates too much of an insulin response?
If drinks such as Crystal Light are bad, what can a person with Type 2 diabetes drink besides water?
(My husband has no colon, so extra hydration is critical.)
Seven non-nutritive sweeteners are approved for use in the United States: acesulfame K, aspartame, luo han guo fruit extract, neotame, saccharin, stevia and sucralose.
They have different functional properties that may affect perceived taste or use in different food applications.
They are all approved for use in the United States and determined to be safe.
Splenda (sucralose) and Truvia (erythritol and stevia leaf extract) are brand names.
If you find differences in blood sugar response when eating any foods with non-nutritive sweeteners, you may want to switch to another type of sweetener.
There are also flavorings on the market made without any non-nutritive sweeteners that you can add to water that are very low carb (less than 1 gram per serving).
The ones I have seen are lemon, orange or lime-based.
How do I know how much fruit is a fruit serving?
Fruits vary in size and density.
A good resource might be one found at the American Diabetes Association website: http://www.diabetes.org/food-and-fitness/food/what-can-i-eat/making-healthy-food-choices/fruits.html or see your registered dietitian for an updated list of fruits and carb content.
I eat a bagel from the bagel store every morning.
Is that a bad thing?
Bagels aren’t bad, but they are a dense source of carbohydrates.
Every ounce of a bagel is like a slice of bread.
Some of the bagel stores have 5-ounce bagels.
That would be like eating five slices of bread.
If you are on medication for diabetes, you may want to be aware of the amount of carbohydrate you eat at any one meal and moderate the size of the bagel or the amount (for example, eat half).
Why do family members keep telling me to stop eating bananas?
I thought the potassium was good for me.
Bananas are a good source of potassium.
They are also a good source of carbohydrates.
A 4-inch banana is about 15 grams of carbohydrates, so a typical 8-inch banana has about 30 grams of carbs, or about the amount in two slices of bread.
Are you eating the banana with cereal and milk (other carb sources)?
It may be more about how much carbohydrates you are eating at one time then about whether or not you are eating a banana.
I like to drink milk.
I drink milk for breakfast whether it’s with cereal or just as a drink.
I also like to have a glass a milk before bed.
How does milk affect blood sugar?
Eight ounces of milk has about 12 grams of carbohydrate.
It is also a good source of protein (about 8 grams/cup) and calcium, vitamin D and potassium.
What is the size of your milk glass?
The amount of milk you drink at any one time (and what you drink it with) may affect your blood sugars.
How do you eliminate carbs in your diet, slowly or cold turkey?
First of all, why would you want to eliminate all carbs?
As we mentioned earlier, a style of eating for diabetes is a heart-healthy diet.
That can include fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.
To moderate your carb intake, start by taking a look at what you drink (sugared beverages) and snack on.
Try to be more plant-based and less processed (candy, pastries, sugar sweet beverages).
What carbs are better for Type 2 diabetes?
Plant-based carbohydrates such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains and starchy vegetables including beans/lentils.
Foods with higher fiber may take longer to digest and decrease the after-meal glucose spikes.
We like our breads, pastas and rice, and it seems like whole grains are the way to go.
How much better are whole grains in the diet?
Can this be measured?
Yes.
Whole grains are often higher in vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants than their processed counterparts.
Measurements: 1 slice of whole grain bread, 1/3 cup cooked whole grain pasta and rice, 1/4 cup old fashioned dry oats = 15 grams of carbohydrates.
If you are going to have a snack with carbs before going to bed, how soon should you have that snack before bedtime?
There are no set times.
It may depend on when you take your last medication or when you ate dinner (and how your diabetes medication is working).
Our gastroenterologists recommend to stop eating two to three hours before bedtime to avoid any reflux and indigestion.
Can I eat a no-carbohydrate meal?
That might depend on what medications you are taking for your diabetes.
If you are on medications that may lower your blood glucose (sulfonylureas), you should include a carbohydrate source at each meal.
If you are only taking metformin, you should not have a problem with a low/no carb meal (like chicken on a salad, an egg/vegetable omelet or a vegetable stir fry.
Can you talk about alcohol consumption.
I like to drink beer, maybe one to three a day, sometimes more depending on the occasion.
What effects can this have on my body?
What is a safe level of alcohol consumption?
For healthy individuals not on any medications, recommendations include no more than two alcoholic drinks/day for men, and no more than 1/day for women.
Please check with your doctor or pharmacist regarding your safety if you drink alcohol and you are on any medications.
When drinking alcohol, is one type (wine, beer, liquor) preferred or less harmful over the other?
The new 2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans address alcohol equivalentshttps://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/resources/2015-2020_Dietary_Guidelines.pdf.
Twelve fluid ounces of beer (five percent alcohol) is considered one drink equivalent.
So is 5 ounces of wine (12 percent alcohol) or 1.5 ounces 80 proof distilled spirits.
The higher the alcohol content, the more potent the beverage.
For example: 12 ounces of beer with 9 percent alcohol content is like 1.8 drinks.
Also, consider if you have the distilled spirits (for example, vodka, whiskey) over ice or with a sugar sweet beverage.
A margarita may have 40 or more grams of carbohydrate depending on how it is made.
It sounds like you are already aware of what goal blood sugars should be and what personally throws them off.
For the benefit of the others in this web chat, let's review what goal range blood sugars are: pre-meal: 80-130 mg/dL; post-meal (two hours after starting meal): less than 180 mg/dL; bedtime: 100-140 mg/dL.
The goal is more than 50 percent of these values within target range.
Talk with your doctor for what your goals might be following steroid shots.
If your after-meal blood sugars are high, take a look at how much carbohydrate you had at that meal.
Moderating the amount of carbohydrate will help keep the blood sugars in goal range.
If after-meal blood sugars are higher than goal range, try some exercise.
Light walking may help.
Your last question is about your meter.
Make sure you cap your strips after taking them out of the container.
They can absorb moisture in the air and then be inaccurate.
Also, make sure your hands are clean from lotions.
Finally, don't use outdated monitoring strips.
I have an issue with high morning, fasting blood sugars.
I find that eating before going to bed tends to keep them lower.
Have you any recommendations for the best things to eat?
I normally try to eat protein but would something more balanced be better?
People respond in different ways.
You may find that 15 to 30 grams of carbohydrates as a night snack might work for you, depending on your calorie needs.
Try different foods, and try to be consistent with exercise (so that is not a variable).
Note the difference between blood sugars from day to day.
Why is it that blood sugars are highest in the morning (130-135), late PM (115-120)?
Is this a problem for me?
Gluconeogenesis – the big name for your liver making glucose and putting it into the bloodstream – is probably the biggest reason for morning blood sugars being elevated.
Losing weight, if you are overweight, and regularly exercising may prevent this from happening.
If your morning blood sugars continue to be out of goal range, talk to your doctor.
Do you think all people with Type 2 diabetes should make nutrition therapy a part of their treatment plan?
What we eat does affect how we feel, including the energy we have for the day.
And what we eat can make a difference in our health.
So lifestyle changes, such as what you eat (nutrition), can definitely help people manage Type 2 diabetes.
Can exercise help in the process of having glucose absorbed into the body cells?
Yes!
Exercise has been described as being effective as one medication for helping to manage Type 2 diabetes.
Is there any proof that exercise lowers blood sugar?
Yes.
Many studies support exercise as a lifestyle change to help manage blood sugars.
But why not experiment on yourself, Track your blood sugars over the next month on days you exercise and days you don't, and look at the trends.
