In 2010, I had a branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO) and have lost eyesight in the upper hemisphere of my right eye.
In 2014, I had a stent implant in my coronary artery.
Here are my questions.
Thanks for answering them.
The risk of a subsequent retinal artery occlusion depends on the underlying condition that may have contributed to its formation.
For example, if someone has an underlying inflammatory condition that contributed to the artery occlusion, the risk may be higher of a second event than in someone in whom the occlusion occurred without other risk factors.
Regarding the use of Plavix or other anticoagulants:.
The evidence has not supported a clear use of these medicines for the treatment or prevention of BRAO.
However, often there are other systemic conditions that may benefit from these medicines (such as having a stent).
This decision should be guided by a primary care physician or cardiologist.
There is ongoing investigation into ways to deal with the occlusion.
To date, studies have generally had results that showed limited benefits of agents, such as clot-busting drugs (e.g., tPA), and potential systemic risks.
New potential surgical procedures and targeted delivery of therapeutics may offer some hope in these cases in the future.
It is difficult to determine what the specific condition is without evaluating the scans and performing a clinical examination.
Generally speaking, if there is retinal damage that persists for more than several months, it often does not completely resolve.
Sometimes, it can improve over time, but other times it does remain.
I would suggest asking your doctor where the damage is located (e.g., retina, nerve) and potentially inquire about a referral to see an appropriate specialist to better answer your questions.
I have been diagnosed with the following If the findings of your exam showed only drusen and RPE changes without any evidence of choroidal neovascularization activity (such as macular edema, subretinal fluid, retinal hemorrhage), this suggests that your wet AMD is being well controlled with your injections.
You should clarify with your doctor your exact diagnosis.
Neovascular AMD and "wet macular degeneration" are synonyms.
In 1995, my son had an eye injury.
He and his friends were playing "homerun derby" when they found a golf ball on the town field and decided to hit it with a bat.
Unfortunately, my son was pitching and tried to catch the ball.
It hit him in the eye, causing major damage (whole in the center of retina, orbital fracture, pushed the eye back a little).
He ended up having surgery, removing vitreous fluid and attempting to close the hole, which wasn't very successful.
As a result, today he only has peripheral vision; the center vision is entirely dead.
My question is: Eleven years later, is there any surgery that can reverse the damage and possibly give him some vision back in that eye through the retina?
Retina replacement, etc.?
When a macular hole does not close, additional surgical repair can be attempted.
However, this is usually preferred in the near future following the first surgery.
If the hole has been there for several years, the potential benefit from trying to close that hole is minimal.
Additionally, in trauma, the retina can be damaged such that even if the hole is closed, we do not see return of function.
There are significant efforts in research toward regenerative therapy (e.g., stem cells, potential partial transplantation), but all of these studies are either still in animal models or very early on in clinical studies.
In 2012, I had surgery for a detached retina where I got the scleral buckle (sponge).
I had extreme double vision in that eye immediately; and two months later, I had eye muscle surgery to help with left hypotropia.
That surgery was not successful.
I had a second eye muscle surgery on September 17, 2012, with a different surgeon.
That surgery helped the double vision a lot for a few months, and then it got worse again.
My body makes too much scar tissue.
I still have double vision, but I have gotten used to it.Is there anything more I can do?
I am also worried about the future when I have to have cataract eye surgery on that eye.
How difficult that would be?
I am a 77-year-old female.
Significant double vision after scleral buckle surgery is a known potential risk.
In many cases, it resolves over time, but in other cases, it requires more significant interventions.
It is often challenging to manage.
Scleral buckle removal and muscle surgeries are both potential options.
I would not expect the double vision issue to complicate the cataract surgery, but unfortunately cataract surgery won't likely improve the double vision.
Given that it has been almost four years since your last surgery, it is also tough to know if additional surgery would be helpful given the level of scarring.
I always think that second opinions can be helpful in these situations with both a retina specialist and a strabismus specialist (muscle-surgeon, often a pediatric ophthalmologist).
Are there any negative implication to having cataract surgery on the progression or other issues with early, dry AMD?
There is no evidence that having cataract surgery results in progression of early, dry AMD.
Depending on the level of AMD, it is always important to consider the potential impact of the AMD on overall vision and that it may impact the overall visual outcome.
Is there a link between cataract surgery and macular holes?
There has not been a clear link established between cataract surgery and macular hole.
The development of a macular hole is associated with the vitreous jelly pulling on the center of the retina (macula).
This can result in the development of a hole.During cataract surgery, there can be some normal shifts in the vitreous jelly that could theoretically pull more on the retina.
However, it is not clear whether a macular hole specifically resulted from cataract surgery or that the macular hole would have developed regardless of cataract surgery.
When a patient has two retinal issues (such as wet AMD and an epiretinal membrane), it is always challenging to discern which process is primarily responsible for the visual symptoms.
For example, both the epiretinal membrane and the wet AMD can result in blurring and distortion.
I always suggest that having the wet AMD under complete control is really important prior to considering surgical intervention.
I also always feel that when it is unclear whether surgery is helpful that a second opinion can be really useful.
These membranes can form due to multiple causes.
Most frequently, we are not able to identify a specific cause.
In these cases, they are thought to result from the abnormal interaction of the vitreous jelly in the back of the eye and the retinal surface.
Other potential associated causes include retinal tears, retinal vascular occlusions, inflammatory eye disease, diabetic retinopathy and others.Once it has been removed during surgery, depending on the surgical technique and approach, the risk of significant recurrence is between one percent and 10 percent.
I also was wondering if I was more likely to get an epiretinal membrane formation in my left eye since I already had one in my right?
There is probably a small increased risk for developing an epiretinal membrane.
However, if your doctor has performed scans and examined the back of your other eye, and there is no evidence of any significant membrane at this time, the risk of needing surgery in your other eye is probably pretty small.
I am 77 years old and in excellent health, but I have been diagnosed with a lamellar macular hole in my left eye.
I appear to be at level two on the cataract scale of four.
I have been told the hole is about the size of a pin head.
The condition was detected three years ago, and the retina specialist believes the best course of action is to monitor the hole.
At this time, most of my reading is done via my right eye, with the left eye closed.
When trying to use both eyes, the printed line becomes distorted.
Straight lines that define the lanes on highways become distorted and wavy.
Here are my questions Lamellar macular holes are typically caused by the growth of a membrane on the surface of the retina or loss of a portion of the macular tissue.
Generally speaking, they can be symptomatic but the vision loss is not severe.
The only potential treatment for lamellar macular holes is surgery.
However, this is controversial.
The results are quite variable, and if the symptoms are mild and the vision remains fairly good, many retinal surgeons will recommend observation alone.
Lamellar macular holes usually do not progress significantly or progress slowly.
There is likely a higher risk of developing it in your other eye, but there are no specific preventive measures.
I have been diagnosed with macular degeneration and begun a routine of shots in my eyes every four weeks for the foreseeable future.
Are these shots an attempt to prevent dry macular from turning into wet, or do they indicate that my condition is already the wet kind and the drops may help to keep me from losing my vision?
The only approved therapies for macular degeneration that involve shots are for the wet macular degeneration.
Many physicians initiate treatment every four weeks, but often spread the shots out if the patient is doing well and responds well to the therapy over time.
There are now medications that are under investigation (e.g., clinical trials) for dry macular degeneration that involve shots as well.
I would suggest clarifying with your physician what specific condition you have.
One thing has puzzled me about Lucentis injections as a treatment for age-related macular degeneration.
My layman's understanding is that the optimum treatment cycle is an injection every 30 days, but there seems to be a focus on reducing the number of shots through "trial and (unfortunately) error."
In my case, my AMD had stabilized until the interval reached seven months.
There seems to be more focus on cost containment and reduction of patient discomfort than on positive outcomes.
Should patients have more of a say in establishing the treatment timetable?
If AMD develops in my other eye, I would like to be able to insist on monthly injections.
My personal belief is that all patients should have a major say in the treatment timetable.
I actually discuss the evidence for a few different approaches to the management of macular degeneration and let them choose.
Generally speaking, very few retinal specialists perform long-term monthly therapy.
Several studies have shown that more personalized approaches may also have excellent outcomes while reducing overall treatment and visit burden for the patient.
I understand there is a new treatment and hope for those who suffer with macular degeneration.
If so, can you tell me if there is any new treatment or breakthrough regarding myopic degeneration.
Is there a way to slow down the progression to avoid retina damage and or hemorrhaging?
Over the last several years, multiple new medications have emerged for the treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration.
Many of these treatments are used by retina specialists for the management of myopic degeneration when choroidal neovascularization occurs.
This is an abnormal growth of blood vessels, similar to wet macular degeneration, that may result in retinal swelling or hemorrhage.
Although these medications are not specifically approved for myopic degeneration, multiple small studies have shown that they can be effective in treating the abnormal blood vessels when they occur.
There is a lot of research on how to slow down "dry" myopic degeneration, but there are no currently approved treatments.
To make an appointment with Justis Ehlers, MD, or any of the other specialists in the Cole Eye Institute at Cleveland Clinic, please call 216.444.2020 or call toll-free at 800.223.2273, ext.
42020.
You can also visit us online athttp://my.clevelandclinic.org/eye.
Learn more about retinal conditionsRetinal Detachmenthttp://my.clevelandclinic.org/services/cole-eye/diseases-conditions/hic-retinal-detachmentRetinal Vein Occlusionhttp://my.clevelandclinic.org/services/cole-eye/diseases-conditions/hic-retinal-vein-occlusionRetinitis Pigmentosahttp://my.clevelandclinic.org/services/cole-eye/diseases-conditions/retinitis-pigmentosaRetinoblastomahttp://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases_conditions/hic_retinoblastomaRetinopathy of Prematurityhttp://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases_conditions/retinopathy_of_prematurity For additional information about clinical trials, visitClinicalTrials.gov.
MyChart®is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org.
