I am a 66-year-old male, and I exercise vigorously (running, strength training, etc.) most days.
I have been waking up after about three hours sleep, stay wide awake, and am unable to fall back asleep.
Then, I spend the next day very lethargic and taking multiple naps.
This happens particularly after heavy exercise or if I am stressed.Taking 25 mg to 50 mg of generic Benadryl seems to alleviate the problem, and if I do wake up, I can fall back to sleep and usually get six to eight hours of sleep and feel energetic and rested the next day.
Is this the best way to handle this problem?
Your solution is effective, but tolerance to Benadryl can ensue with long-term use.
A better solution would be to determine why you are waking up and then prevent this night-time awakening.
There are a multitude of potential causes of early morning awakening that are readily correctable.
Of note, exercise is good for sleep as long as it is not performed within a few hours of sleep onset.
Otherwise, this exercise can cause sleep initiation difficulty, which does not appear to be an issue for you.
Daytime napping can perpetuate insomnia because when you nap during the day, you are taking away from your sleep at night.
We recommend avoidance of daytime napping to help facilitate sleep at night. Consider being evaluated by a sleep specialist to determine why you wake up and to identify the best solution for the source of the insomnia.  I am 68 years old, and lately have been waking at 3:00 a.m. or 4:00 a.m. with no chance of going back to sleep.
Why?
I am aware that other people in my age group also wake early, even though they did not during their younger years.
There are a multitude of reasons why patients awaken in the early morning hours.
These causes range from depression to sleep apnea.
While it is true that as we age our circadian rhythms weaken and we are prone to more awakenings from sleep and more prone to take naps during the day, this should not simply be accepted.
Many patients needlessly suffer when treatment is available.
Consider seeing a sleep specialist.   Hello.
I am a 63-year-old male.
My sleep pattern is odd.
I go to bed, seemingly lucid, about 8:30 p.m. to watch a little TV, and I usually "pass out," only to awaken at 12:00 p.m. or so and toss and turn until 3:00 or 4:00 a.m.
Then, I fall back to sleep until 6:00 a.m.
I hate this "big hole" in my sleep.
I have tried Sonata and diazepam 10 mg with no results.
May I have your input or suggestions?
In order to help you, we have to determine why you wake up at midnight.
There are a variety of potential sources.
Some common causes include sleep apnea, insomnia (including all of its derivations), and psychiatric and medical sources of sleep fragmentation.
In an evaluation, we ask a host of questions to determine what is waking you up.
Once we have identified the source, then proper treatment can commence. Medications can be used to treat insomnia, but they only cover the insomnia rather than cure the underlying source.
As such, these medications will have to be used indefinitely if the insomnia is a long-term issue (more than several weeks).
The use of these medications long term can result in addiction (with some) and tolerance (with most/all).
Tolerance is the phenomena of needing to take increasingly large doses to achieve the same effect, and thus is not a good long-term solution because side effects ensue.
There are non-medication solutions for insomnia that correct the underlying source.
Consider seeing a sleep specialist to address your sleep disorder.    The first step is to ensure that your REM-specific sleep apnea is well-controlled.
This is commonly accomplished by reviewing a CPAP download, which will determine how compliant you are with treatment, whether there are significant mask leaks and whether the sleep apnea is well-controlled.
If all of these findings are good, then this would suggest that the OSA is well-controlled and your non-restorative sleep is a result of some other disorder. The next step would be to ensure that the restless legs syndrome (RLS) is well-controlled.
This is determined by your subjective report of whether you have an ongoing urge to move the legs.
Approximately 85 percent of people with RLS have periodic limb movements during sleep, which can also cause non-restorative sleep. What would be helpful is a history and physical examination by a sleep specialist to determine the above and whether other sleep disorders are present that are causing the non-refreshing sleep.  Thanks.
Yes, my apnea is very well-controlled, there are no leaks, and my AHI is typically around 0-1.
Also, I believe my RLS is much better since taking iron, and most evenings it does not bother me.
I have been disappointed to still not feel like I'm getting restorative sleep.
My wife often lightly snores at night, and I do hear her choke or cough during sleep once every few days if I am awake during the night.
She takes a small amount of Ambien and melatonin to get good sleep almost every night, often getting up in the morning to take a little more.
She has good energy when she sleeps longer but less when she doesn’t.
What do you suggest for her?
Your wife needs a sleep study to determine if she has sleep apnea.
It is unusual for a bed partner to misinterpret seeing someone stop breathing during their sleep.
Untreated sleep apnea can cause high blood pressure and has been associated with a variety of concerning disorders include heart attack, stroke, irregular heart beat and heart failure.  You are on a very high CPAP setting.
The air is forced through the hose into the mask and then through your nose and mouth to the back of the throat where the obstruction typically takes place.
This pressure holds the airway open and thus prevents obstructive respiratory events. It is believed that having some respiratory events is perfectly normal as long as the AHI is less than 5.
Some patients can have an AHI of >5 that may be the result of an inappropriate CPAP setting (too high or low), significant mask leaks or the development of central respiratory events.
If you have a fixed CPAP machine set at 19 cmH20, and it was not turned off or a ramp used, it should not increase in pressure.
An auto-CPAP machine is always adjusting to your pressure needs, and this machine could certainly explain why the pressure is ramping up at 3:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m.
By the way, if you go to bed at 9:00 p.m. to midnight, then by 3:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m., you may be in REM sleep, which often requires higher CPAP settings.
There are several solutions for mask leaks:1) wash the mask daily; 2) wash your face nightly; 3) consider using a cloth mask insert (one brand name is REMzzz; 4) if all above fail, then consider a different mask.
CPAP is an important treatment for OSA in patients who have atrial fibrillation.
Studies have demonstrated that the use of CPAP does reduce the recurrence of atrial fibrillation and can reduce incidence of heart attack. The first step is determining whether the OSA is well-controlled using your current setting of CPAP.
This can be accomplished by obtaining a download to determine how many hours you are using the device, whether there is an excessive leak and whether the OSA is well-controlled (AHI<5).
If all of these things are good, then a history and physical exam needs to be performed to determine whether other sleep disorders are present that could account for your residual excessive daytime sleepiness.  Gabapentin is a medication that was developed for control of seizures.
It is a very safe medication that has been used since the 1990s.There are no long-term repercussions from its use that we are aware of thus far.
This medication is able to both control pain and enhance sleep, which has synergistic effects.
I am not aware of a natural substitute that could accomplish both of these objectives.
It is important for you to consider seeing a sleep disorder provider to determine if you have an actual sleep disorder that is responsible for your sleep issues and would require independent treatment.
My teenage daughter (16) has struggled with sleep for some time.
I believe it's because she is constantly thinking, possibly worrying (type A personality).
What signs do I need to look for that would tell me that she may be struggling with a sleep disorder and may need to see a doctor? Signs/symptoms to watch for include non-refreshing sleep, difficulty awakening in the morning, mood changes, worsening grades, excessive daytime sleepiness, daytime fatigue, presence of over-the-counter sleep aids (use of Nyquil, Tylenol PM, etc.) or stimulants (for example, 5 Hour Energy, energy drinks, etc.).
A pediatric sleep physician could be helpful in correcting your daughter's sleep issues.
My 10-year-old has anxiety and sleep issues. We have not found a medication that helps with the anxiety.
We give him 3 mg of melatonin about five nights per week.
Do you see any problems with this?
Please consider seeing a pediatric sleep specialist.
These physicians routinely see patients just like your son to help ensure he sleeps well at night.
I am a 77-year-old female.
I exercise daily and live and eat very healthy. I do have heart disease, basically blockages in LAD (five stents).
I have been suffering from chronic insomnia for many years.
I believe it is hormone related, at least it used to be.I do all the suggested things: go to bed at the same time, cool bedroom, no electronics ½ hour before bed, etc.
I also have been tested for sleep apnea.
I have also tried various relaxation tapes, yoga, etc.
Over the years, I have tried almost all over-the-counter medications, including melatonin, valerian, teas, etc. I also have tried quite a few prescription sleep aids.
Lunesta worked for a while until it went generic, which does not seem to help. I have difficulty falling asleep and staying asleep.
Last night again, I could not fall asleep, and this morning I woke up at 3:30.
I do believe that my insomnia contributes to my heart disease.
Do you have any suggestions for me?
An excellent long-term solution for this problem is cognitive and behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I), which entails much more than sleep hygiene and relaxation tapes.
This can be performed online, via group meetings and one-on-one.
One-on-one CBT-I is performed by attending meetings once per month (most commonly for four months), and each visit you are taught a different CBT-I technique.
This is very helpful for about 70 percent of patients, but it is not a passive process.
Patients are taught techniques that require much practice, buy in and motivation on the patient's part.
I think this is your best hope.    My son is 21 and refuses to take sleep medications (even over-the-counter ones) because he is afraid of becoming addicted to them, so he has been suffering from insomnia symptoms for a couple of years now.
He has tried natural remedies such as music and app downloads, but nothing seems to be helping. Do you have any suggestions? Provided your son has insomnia, a sleep psychologist could readily treat your son's condition using non-medication approaches that are referred to as CBT-I.
Please see other response.
Sleep inertia ruins my mornings.
Is there any way to stop or lessen it?
Sleep inertia is manifested by having great difficulty awakening in the morning and the need for multiple alarm clocks.
In addition, family members often have to call to help awaken the patient, and once the person is awakened, they are groggy, confused, prone to mistakes, automobile accidents etc.
Treatment of this symptom depends on the cause. Sources of this symptom include: Central hypersomnias (like narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia) and the use of long-acting stimulants at night or early morning short-acting stimulants.
Other, less common causes are delayed sleep phase syn, which requires the use of phototherapy and melatonin, and OSA, which can be treated a multitude of ways, but the first line approach is CPAP.  One possible cause is idiopathic insomnia, which is characterized by an early onset, the absence of an inciting source (i.e. abuse, etc.) and an unrelenting course.
This is a difficult-to-treat insomnia.
I would recommend an evaluation by a sleep disorders specialist to determine if this is really the source and to rule many other more treatable conditions.
This is not to say that there is no hope for patients with idiopathic insomnia.
Treatment with CBT-I and medication may be helpful.  Learn more about symptoms, causes, diagnostic tests and treatments for sleep disorders. http://my.clevelandclinic.org/services/neurological_institute/sleep-disorders-center/patient-education/hic-sleep-basics http://my.clevelandclinic.org/services/neurological_institute/sleep-disorders-center/patient-education/hic-sleep-glossary http://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases_conditions/hic_Common_Sleep_Disorders http://my.clevelandclinic.org/services/neurological_institute/sleep-disorders-center/disorders-conditions/hic-sleep-apnea http://my.clevelandclinic.org/services/neurological_institute/sleep-disorders-center/patient-education/hic-sleep-and-aging  http://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases_conditions/hic_Sleep_Studies http://www.clevelandclinic.org/lp/sleep_disorders/ http://my.clevelandclinic.org/services/neurological_institute/sleep-disorders-center/research-clinical-trials MyChart®: Your Personal Health Connection is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org
