How can I have more energy during the day?
Try to eat more low-glycemic foods that contain healthy fats, protein, fiber and whole grains.
This means switching from white bread and pastas to whole grain; from breakfast cereals to oats, bran or barley; and adding more fruits and vegetables.
High-glycemic foods spike your blood sugar.
Also I’m always on the run.
How can I find simple ways to eat better?
Some tips for eating better include  Do you have any tips for when there just is not enough time to eat a full meal during the workday?
Eat small meals or snacks every few hours, and get in the habit of packing healthy snacks and keeping them with you at work or when you are out running errands.
It helps to meal plan/snack plan and follow by grocery shopping for the week in order to avoid fast food and vending machines. Pack raw veggies, fruit and nuts.
Don't forget a water bottle, and avoid soda and sugary drinks.
How can I feel more emotionally balanced?
Here are some suggestions How can I become more mentally focused?
You can use affirmations that you find helpful.
Read them to yourself each morning or before work.
Try journaling before you go to bed. Another tip is to take a brief work break every couple hours or so to breathe, walk or gaze out the window.
When you come back to work, you will be more focused.
What are the signs and indicators that a person is nearing a burn-out status?
Some of the signs and indicators of nearing burn-out status can include fatigue, poor appetite and gastrointestinal issues, as well as irritability, anxiety and depression. If you start to feel like you are nearing burn-out status, then it is time to slow down and take time for you, for self-care. Identify the cause of your symptoms of burn out and work on the stress management tools that work for you.
How can I create a positive outlook on life?
Try investing your full and best energy on the moments that matter most.
Focus your energy on what you want, not on what you don’t want. Avoid disturbing things.
This might include not watching violent movies or TV shows, and taking a break from negative news.
Is walking really that good for you?
Yes.
For every hour you walk, you add an hour to your life.
The good news is everyone can do it and it doesn’t cost anything.
Even if you have joint pain or other aches and pains, it is important to move your body.
It may be at your own pace, but movement and walking are the best things you can do to keep your body functioning.
If it’s hard to find time for it, fit it in whenever you can.
When you go shopping, park far away from the door; when you have a meeting on the fourth floor, take the steps instead of the elevator; when you have a few minutes after dinner, take a walk around the block.
Short walks add up.
How can I try to prevent chronic disease?
We all know we need to eat well, exercise, avoid stress and get enough sleep, but other preventive measures for disease include It is funny that one of the first things you said is to stop multi-tasking.
We have been so programmed, as children and now in our professions, to do multiple things at once.
Definitely, doing one thing at a time and even mastering being “unplugged” from technology is a huge goal.
This is not really a question, but more of a conversation starter.
I feel pretty stressed when I get home from work and think of all the things I still have to do.
Is there a good way to transition from work to home in managing my stress levels?
Yes.
I am sure most of us have this same concern.
Work-life balance is important to remember and helpful in maintaining your overall well-being.
Some good ways to transition from work to home would be to change up your routine. When you leave work, focus on your family and home-life, put yourself first rather than worrying about what you did not have a chance to finish.
Practice a stress management technique daily, whether it is yoga, meditation or physical activity.
The Cleveland Clinic has a program called Stress Free Now with e-coaching: https://shop.clevelandclinicwellness.com/collections/online-programs/products/stress-free-now-online-program.
I just started a wellness group in my department.
Do you have any tips for easy, collaborative work de-stressing/wellness movements to incorporate in a large, high demanding department?
First let me say congratulations on being a Wellness Champion! Each area or department is unique, so finding one program that works for everyone will be a challenge.
Try surveying the group to see what they are interested in and then going from there.
Our employee wellness website has resources to help facilitate wellness and stress management activitiesClevelandClinic.org/employeewellness.
As one of the world's most respected academic medical centers, Cleveland Clinic sees first-hand the consequences of certain preventable conditions and their effects on the health care system.
We are dedicated to helping our patients, community members, and employees achieve optimal well-being and a high quality of life.
We do this by combining world-class medical care and quality wellness programs to change unhealthy behaviors and to make healthy life choices.
Learn more about this topic and additional health topics.
MyChart®Your Personal Health Connection is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org
