is a staff physician and medical orthopaedic physician in the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery at Cleveland Clinic.
He is active in many research projects within areas of orthopaedics and also held several positions, including co-lead for soft tissue application of cell-based therapies for orthopaedics, chair of the Orthopaedic Technology Committee and Major League Baseball (MLB) Independent Medical Examiner for Disability Physicals.
I'm about to have back surgery because there is a cyst on my spine.
While the doctor is in there, he will be putting a screw in the two lower bones of my spine to hold them together because they are moving and there is no cartilage left in between the bones.
I've stopped taking my steroids weeks before the surgery.
He doesn't want me starting my steroids for 12 weeks after the surgery.
If I start before, he says the steroid will weaken my bones and the screw will not hold.
Do you have any advice on how to not lose the cartilage between your bones?
Cartilage loss is the hallmark of osteoarthritis.
The main contributors to losing cartilage include some underlying genetics, overload, improper mechanics and injury.
Unfortunately, we do not know who will and will not develop osteoarthritis.
However, obesity, improper form during work and exercise, and overload all can lead to degeneration and overuse of cartilage.
We recently published an article on the Cleveland Clinic Health Essentials page outlining the five best ways to safeguard your joints as you age.
Check it out here.https://health.clevelandclinic.org/2017/09/5-best-ways-to-safeguard-your-joints-as-you-age/ 1) Are some people more prone to bone spurs in joints?
As an aging athlete, I've addressed bone spurs in both my hips and one shoulder.
2) How can aging athletes (who may have incurred more stress and abuse on their joints) best maintain joint functionality?
Which exercises, nutrition plans, supplements are best in this scenario?3) What is the difference between an achy joint versus arthritis in a joint?
Bone spurs, also known as "osteophytes" in joints or "enthesophytes" at the insertion of tendons or ligaments on bones, are protrusions of bone that occur because of long-term inflammation or increased traction of tendons pulling on bones. Osteophytes and enthesophytes typically do not hurt, but they are evidence that there is an underlying degenerative or over-use problems.
These bony protrusions can become problematic if they are irregularly placing pressure on tendons and other soft tissue such as the rotator cuff in the shoulder.
We recently published an article on the Cleveland Clinic Health Essentials page outlining the Five Best Ways to Safeguard Your Joints As You Age.
Check it out here.https://health.clevelandclinic.org/2017/09/5-best-ways-to-safeguard-your-joints-as-you-age/ I am 43 years old, have had treatment for my right hip and SI joint, and can vouch for physical therapy (and following the suggested stretching and exercises).
My range of motion improved from seven to 28 (versus 35 on my left).
With a benign tumor on my pelvis over the right hip joint, my right hip is a mess.
I still run, bike, ski, etc., and am looking to take on more yoga and swimming.
How else can I avoid a hip replacement when I get older?
I’m glad to see you are making improvement with physical therapy and are motivated to stay active.
Knowing the underlying cause of your hip pain will be essential to giving you a plan for the future.
You should have an appointment with a joint preservation specialist to help figure out that cause.
We recently published an article on the Cleveland Clinic Health Essentials page outlining the Five Best Ways to Safeguard Your Joints As You Age.
Check it out here.https://health.clevelandclinic.org/2017/09/5-best-ways-to-safeguard-your-joints-as-you-age/ What questions do I need to be ready for at an initial consultation with an orthopedic surgeon regarding long-standing hip pain and recent-onset knee pain?
Both conditions have been mostly knocked out by a temporary prescription for meloxicam.
You should prepare a written history regarding the hip and knee pain including the length of symptoms, what makes the symptoms better or worse, how much pain you get, how much decreased function you experience, and history of physical therapy, brace use, medications, injections, imaging and surgeries.
You should also outline your goals to discuss with your joint preservation specialist.
These would include activities you would like to return to doing and any activities you would like to start doing.
It is also important to make sure any other medical problems are under control by your primary care physician.
Your visit with your joint preservation specialist will go in depth into the complex nature of osteoarthritis and the comprehensive plan that we have created.
There are many options available for treatment in the Joint Preservation Center, but a thorough history and physical is a must in order to determine which treatments are appropriate for you.
How do you find a joint preservation specialist?
I have never heard of this term before.
While we don't have the information on our website at this time, it is currently being written and will go live very soon.
This will share with you the conditions we treat and treatment options available.  To make an appointment with Dominic King, DO or any of the other specialists in the Orthopaedic and Rheumatologic Institute at Cleveland Clinic, please call 216.518.3444. You can also visit us online at clevelandclinic.org/orthorheum Note: This is the number to the Cleveland Clinic Sports Health Center.
I am looking forward to my appointment the first week in October, my first time with an orthopedist DO/surgeon.
I have lots of questions for him.
I am interested in PT, proper exercise, weight loss and NSAID's long before any surgery.
In the Joint Preservation Center, we love it when patients come excited about their care and interested in all the different options we have available.
Joint pain typically is a multi-factorial problem, and joint preservation typically involves a multi-modal approach.
We look forward to seeing you and appreciate your enthusiasm.
Can PRP be effective when there is bone on bone in the knee joint?
Bone-on-bone arthritis is the same as saying severe or "end-stage" osteoarthritis.
At this level of arthritis, we have been seeing that injection-based therapies are not as effective as when they are used for less severe osteoarthritis.
However, we have had many patients that note improvement in their symptoms despite the severity of their osteoarthritis.
While we are actively researching how PRP works in these types of situations, we do know that it is a safe approach in trying to alleviate the symptoms.
Pain can come from several different places and from several different tissues in the knee joint. A joint preservation specialist can help you localize the pain-generating parts of your knee.
Are PRP injections or hyaluronic acid injections effective in relieving discomfort (six on a scale of one to 10) in bone-on-bone arthritis?
Also, do either of these treatments actually do anything to physiologically improve the joint?
A level six pain on a scale of one to 10 is the ideal pain score for the types of treatments we provide in the Joint Preservation Center.
While we are actively researching how PRP and viscosupplementation (hyaluronic acid) injections work in these types of situations, we do know that they are a safe approach in trying to alleviate symptoms.
We believe that both types of injections play a role in helping to manage the chronic inflammation present in some arthritic knees.
Not everyone responds to these treatments, mainly because each knee is unique, and the pain from osteoarthritis can come from several different places and from several different tissues in the knee joint. A joint preservation specialist can help you localize the pain-generating parts of your knee.
What can you do to stop the progression of knee arthritis and lower back pain from degenerative diseases?
We recently published an article on the Cleveland Clinic Health Essentials page outlining the Five Best Ways to Safeguard Your Joints As You Age.
Check it out here.https://health.clevelandclinic.org/2017/09/5-best-ways-to-safeguard-your-joints-as-you-age/ I have multiple orthopedic injuries and also gastro-esophageal reflux disease.
I take pantaprazole and Zantac for the GERD.
What are acceptable nonprescription medications to take for orthopedic pain, Tylenol, NSAIDs?
Thanks.
You should avoid NSAIDs because of your GERD.
Tylenol could be effective for your pain; however, I am not aware of other medical problems that you may have that could eliminate Tylenol as an option.
You should speak with your primary care physician about the safety and appropriate dosing of Tylenol. In the Joint Preservation Center, we take a very comprehensive look at all of the pain-generating parts of a joint and have several modalities to address this pain.
These modalities range from topical NSAIDs, a TENS unit, various injections, hands-on manual therapy, comprehensive strengthening and stabilizing physical therapy, nutrition consultation with anti-inflammatory diet modification and anti-inflammatory supplements such as turmeric and curcumin, orthobiologic injections and cryoneurolysis.
What might cause someone to be more prone to experiencing labral tears (such as in the hips)?
Are there ways to prevent this from occurring in the future and to facilitate functioning when there is already a labral tear?
Labral tears, like other connective tissue injuries, occur from a combination of underlying anatomic alignment issues and overuse.
Specifically, in the hips, labral tears are more common in people who have FAI or femoroacetabular impingement.
If you think of the hip as a "ball and socket joint," FAI is a condition in which the femur (the ball) can become irregularly impinged against the acetabulum (socket) causing irregular mechanics, inflammation and possibly overload and tearing of the labrum.
Meeting with a joint preservation specialist can help to determine if this is an underlying cause of your hip pain and if you can help manage this condition through appropriate physical therapy, as well as the next steps in management.
Mechanical symptoms can be worrisome and sometimes quite bothersome.
Many times, "cracking and popping" are related to tendons, ligaments and thickened fascia snapping around bones.
An x-ray can show the underlying bones, and a musculoskeletal ultrasound (MSK-US) can give a nice, dynamic look at what might be causing the problem.
It could be as simple as a benign snapping of two tendons past each other, or it could be something more significant.
The good news is it is not painful for you.
We would be happy to evaluate this and try to find an answer for you.
The great news is that Dr. Miniaci is here in Cleveland and also at Cleveland Clinic Canada.
Here is a link to his profile and number to make an appointmenthttps://my.clevelandclinic.org/staff/5017-anthony-miniaci.
I have osteoporosis and lupus, and I take Rayos, which is a steroid.
I take a low dose (10mg), but I take it daily.
Is the steroid weakening my bones?
Corticosteroid injections, also known as steroid or cortisone injections, primarily decrease inflammation.
Inflammation in the body can be harmful if not controlled.
However, inflammation is also what the body uses to heal damaged tissue.
Therefore, corticosteroid injections can have a role in alleviating pain, but the trade-off is an increased risk of damage to cartilage and connective tissue if misused or used too often.
The same goes for oral steroids; however, oral steroids act systemically and affect the entire body.
Injected steroids typically remain local and only affect the joint or tissue they are injected into.
Your physician should be able to describe the most appropriate route of using steroids and how often a steroid should be used.
He or she can also discuss the risks of that steroid for your specific condition.
I have heard that steroids or other injections may alleviate pain, but the effect eventually wears off and they can cause more damage to the joint.
Is this true, always, sometimes?
Corticosteroid injections, also known as steroid or cortisone injections, primarily decrease inflammation.
Inflammation in the body can be harmful if not controlled.
However, inflammation is also what the body uses to heal damaged tissue.
Therefore, corticosteroid injections can have a role in alleviating pain, but the trade-off is an increased risk of damage to cartilage and connective tissue if misused or used too often.
The same goes for oral steroids; however, oral steroids act systemically and affect the entire body.
Injected steroids typically remain local and only affect the joint or tissue they are injected into.
Your physician should be able to describe the most appropriate route of using steroids and how often a steroid should be used.
He or she can also discuss the risks of that steroid for your specific condition.
I am not familiar with the name of the procedure that came out of Europe and I believe is being used in the US.
The method, as I understand, uses stem cells on something like cheese cloth.
Apparently, they can grow new cartilage in this manner that can be placed in a joint area that has lost the cartilage.
Do you know about the procedure to do this, and are you using it at Cleveland Clinic?
In the Joint Preservation Center, we are constantly evaluating the best approaches to the treatment of acute and chronic joint pain.
There are hundreds of different orthobiologic companies offering many different solutions, and hundreds more on the way.
When you meet with your joint preservation specialist at Cleveland Clinic, he or she will discuss the research efforts that are underway and why research is important in critically evaluating the use of these types of products.
Ranked No. 3 in the nation byU.S. News & World Report, Cleveland Clinic’s Department of Orthopaedic Surgery offers expert diagnosis and state-of-the-art treatment for any injury or disease of the bones and joints, from simple fractures to complex tumors.
Cleveland Clinic Sports Healthis a unique center within the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.
It brings together top orthopaedic surgeons, sports and exercise medicine physicians, physician assistants, physical therapists, athletic trainers, registered dietitians, radiologists and exercise physiologists to keep athletes in the game.
Access thousands of health articles, videos and tools to help manage your health.https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health Download the Cleveland Clinic Sports Health Guide MyChart®is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org. A remote second opinion may also be requested from Cleveland Clinic through the secure Cleveland Clinic MyConsult® website.
To request a remote second opinion, visiteclevelandclinic.org/myConsult.
Cleveland Clinic Express Care® OnlineNo longer do you need have to travel to the doctor to be seen by a doctor.
Download our free mobile app and access Ohio’s #1 care from anywhere you can get online.
