Can you explain what egg freezing means?
Are there different methods of freezing?
I have read something about “vitrification.”
Eggs can be cryopreserved/frozen for future use.
Vitrification is the name of the freezing technique that is used to freeze the eggs.
Why do women opt to freeze their eggs?
Women elect to freeze eggs for future use because eggs become less and less likely to result in a successful pregnancy as the woman ages.
Eggs from a woman in her early 30s have a pregnancy rate of about 50 percent to 60 percent after transfer of one embryo.
Embryos formed from eggs from a woman in her early 40s have less than a 10 percent chance of successful pregnancy.
In other words, if a woman freezes her eggs when she is her early 30s and uses them in her 40s, she will have the same pregnancy rate she had when she was in her 30s.
What is the first step if I am interested in pursuing egg freezing as an option?
Women interested in egg freezing should schedule a consultation to discuss the egg freezing process and statistics for success based on their specific information.
It is best to freeze eggs by age 37.
How many eggs should be harvested and frozen?
Generally, women under 38 need to have at least 20 eggs frozen to have the best chance for having at least one baby.
For older patients, the recommendation is to have at least 40 eggs frozen.
What is the average number of eggs that are retrieved during a cycle?
How many are recommended to freeze?
Egg freezing is not a guarantee of future pregnancy.
The number of eggs to freeze in order to have a high chance of achieving one pregnancy is 20.
Does the age of the woman affect the success rate of live birth when using the frozen egg versus a fresh egg?
The age of the woman at the time she made the eggs determines the pregnancy rate.
The age she is when she transfers the embryos has only a small effect.
What is the success rate for IVF when using frozen eggs?
Is one more desirable than the other?
Fresh eggs work better than frozen.
Some frozen eggs will not survive the freeze/thaw process.
How long can eggs be kept frozen?
What happens to frozen eggs once they are no longer needed?
Eggs can be frozen indefinitely.
They are stored at -196 C in large tanks.
These tanks are monitored 365 days a year by an embryologist.
The eggs will be discarded at the patient’s request.
Does egg harvesting damage the ovary or the immature eggs in any way?
Egg retrieval does not appear to have a negative effect on future function of the ovaries.
What is the cost?
Can it be covered by insurance?
Are there storage fees?
The prepayment for egg freezing is $6,974.00.
This includes the cost of egg retrieval and freezing, but does not include the cost of the ovarian stimulation.
The total cost is approximately $11,000.
Some insurance plans do cover egg freezing, but most do not.
Women freezing eggs in anticipation of treatment for cancer are eligible for significant discounts.
Will this process remove all of my current eggs?
Neither freezing eggs or doing IVF uses up eggs.
At the beginning of every menstrual (ovulation) cycle, a group of eggs begins to mature.
One of those eggs becomes the dominant egg that will continue to develop and ovulate.
The remainder of the initial group will stop developing and degenerate.
When we do an ovarian stimulation for egg freezing or IVF, we encourage a larger number of that initial group to continue to develop to maturity.
TheCleveland Clinic Fertility Centerprovides a wide range of services from simple evaluations to state-of-the-art reproductive technologies. http://pages.clevelandclinic.org/infertility-index.html For additional information about clinical trials, visitClinicalTrials.gov.
MyChart®is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org.
Cleveland Clinic Express Care® OnlineNo longer do you need to travel to the doctor to be seen by a doctor.
Download our free mobile app and access Ohio’s #1 care from anywhere you can get online.
If you need more information, click here toLive Chatwith a health educator (click on Questions and then Live Chat) or call the Center for Consumer Health Information at 216.444.3771 or toll-free at 800.223.2272, ext.
43771, to speak with a Health Educator.
