How safe is it to be a living donor?
Have living donors died as a result of the donation procedure?
There are risks associated with being a living donor, including a risk of death that ranges from 0.2 percent to 0.6 percent depending on the lobe that is donated. The right lobe is larger, so it carries more risk. There have been no donor deaths at Cleveland Clinic.
Does a living donor have to pay any money for the procedure?
No.
The living donor evaluation, surgery and post-operative care is all billed to the recipient’s insurance. There may be costs for the donor that include travel, lodging and lost wages.
What are the types of living donor transplants?
At Cleveland Clinic, we perform both living liver and kidney donor transplants.
Does being overweight affect a person’s ability to donate their liver?
Yes.
We require potential donors to have a BMI (body mass index) of less than 30.
If it is more than 30, we will evaluate the donor but will need to do a liver biopsy to rule out a fatty liver.
Does making a living donation affect my future insurability?
What about the recipient? We have the potential donor discuss this with their insurance company.
This has not been an issue with our previous donors.
No donors have lost their insurance. The recipient needs to have living donor liver transplant benefits on their insurance plan.
How long does a typical liver transplant take?
The surgery can last approximately eight to 12 hours.
What factors should be considered when thinking about living versus cadaver donors?
Is there one surgery you prefer over the other?
Also, if a child has to have a liver transplant early in life, what are their chances that they will have to have another one later?
When considering a living donor, the potential recipient must be evaluated and listed at our transplant center. Depending on how sick a patient is, receiving a living donor will happen faster compared to waiting on the national waiting list. As a living donor is being evaluated, the recipient remains active on the waiting list and is still eligible to receive a cadaver organ.
There is a small possibility that a child will need a re-transplant for recurrent disease or rejection.
How long does it take to be evaluated for a liver transplant?
The evaluation for a liver transplant takes place over four to five days.
We have already been told by Pittsburgh Children's that my grandson is not ready for a transplant.
His spleen is getting bigger all the time.
He has biliary atresia and is 2½ .
Do they ever remove the spleen prior to liver transplant?
They generally do not remove the spleen prior to liver transplantation.
If you are interested in a consult at Cleveland Clinic Transplant Center, please call 216 444 1976, option 1.
Are liver transplant evaluations only done at the Cleveland location?
Most evaluations are down at our downtown campus in Cleveland.
We are, however, in the process of starting transplant clinics at our Avon location and also in Akron.
If multi-listing, do you take the test results of the first transplant hospital?
How long does that evaluation last?
Yes.
We take most of the results from the first transplant hospital, but we elect to do the most important tests here, such as cardiac stress testing.
The testing generally is valid for one year and will take one to two days to complete if you decide to come to Cleveland Clinic for double listing.
How long do people wait to receive a liver transplant?
Livers are allocated based on patients’ MELD score.
Typically, with a MELD score around 22, a patient will wait approximately six months.
It also depends on the patient’s blood type.
Can anyone receive a living donor transplant?
If you are a candidate to receive a transplant at our center, then you are a candidate to receive a living donor transplant.
Some patients may not qualify for a living donor transplant if they have had a transplant in the past or have anatomical problems that would preclude LDLT.
How far away is it acceptable to be and still be on the transplant list?
Where do most people stay if they’re from out-of-town?
How long must you stay locally post-transplant?
We have many patients that are listed for a liver transplant that do not live locally. Many of these patients live in another state. Once you receive a liver transplant, you are required to stay within one hour of the main hospital for approximately eight to 12 weeks. We offer transplant rates at the Intercontinental Hotel, Intercontinental Suites and our Transplant House.
When receiving a portion of the liver, how long does it take for the liver to regenerate? It can take approximately four to six weeks for the liver to regenerate.
What are some things to worry about after receiving an organ donation?
In the short term, you should be careful about infections.
In the long term, there is a slight increased risk of cancer, which will require surveillance.
What is the recovery time for a liver recipient? Generally, they stay in the hospital for one week to 10 days.
They can return to work after two to three months, depending on the type of activity.
People in desk jobs can start working a few weeks following their transplant.
When will I be able to drive after the transplantation?
Typically, you can drive once you have stopped taking narcotics or approximately three weeks after transplant.
What is the recovery time for a living donor?
Recovery time for a living donor is six to 12 weeks. There is a weight restriction of no lifting anything greater than 10 pounds for 12 weeks.
Is it safe for a women who has received a liver transplant to have a baby?
What about a living donor, is it safe for the donor to have a baby?
Yes.
It is generally considered  safe to have babies after a liver transplant.
However, it should be a planned event, working closely with a high-risk obstetrician and the transplant center. Living donors have no particular increased risk.
Do recipients have to take medication for the rest of their lives?
Generally, all liver transplant recipients have to take medications for the rest of their lives.
Is it better to have a liver from a living donor rather than a deceased donor?
Outcomes show that the survival rate is better when receiving a living donor liver transplant compared to receiving a deceased donor organ. There is national data available atwww.srtr.org.
The Mikati Center for Liver Diseases, part of the Digestive Disease and Surgery Institute, offers experienced liver specialists to accurately diagnose and offer advanced treatments for all types of liver diseases.
Established in 2013, the Mikati Center was made possible by a generous philanthropic gift of the Mikati family and is dedicated to sustaining and improving the lives of those with liver diseases through advances in research, innovation and education.
The center unites all of the necessary specialists in one setting and helps create individualized treatment plans that are best for patients.
Access thousands of health articles, videos and tools to help manage your health.
Learn About Our Team Approach To Liver Tumor Care For additional information about clinical trials, visitClinicalTrials.gov.
MyChart®Your Personal Health Connection is a secure, online health management tool that connects Cleveland Clinic patients with their personalized health information.
All you need is access to a computer.
For more information about MyChart®, call toll-free at 866.915.3383 or send an email tomychartsupport@ccf.org Cleveland Clinic Express Care® OnlineNo longer do you need have to travel to the doctor to be seen by a doctor.
Download our free mobile app and access Ohio’s #1 care from anywhere you can get online.
