To make an appointment with Dr. Devorah Wieder or any of the other specialists in our OB/GYN and Women’s Health Institute at Cleveland Clinic, please call 216-444-4HER.
You can also visit us onlineclevelandclinic.org/womenshealth.
What are the current recommendations for breast cancer screening?
Monthly self-exams have been under fire lately, but the truth is, most women find breast lumps themselves.
The best time to examine your breasts is after your menstrual cycle is finished.
Have your breasts examined by a healthcare provider at least once every three years after age 20, and every year after age 40.
How do I know if I’m developing osteoporosis?
Within two years of menopause, it is a good idea to talk to your physician about whether you need a bone density test.
This test is a simple, painless scan that determines bone mineral density.
You hear so much in the news about vitamin D, how much of it do I need?
Most people need to take a vitamin D supplement.
Recent evidence has suggested that adequate levels of vitamin D intake can reduce cancer incidence by 70 percent and increase longevity.
Even areas in the country with more sunshine than Cleveland, OH - up to 50 percent or more of the general population are vitamin D insufficient.
After having a Dilation and Curettage why did the bleeding start again?
Postoperative bleeding after a D&C can occur for about 6 weeks and may be continuous or stop and start.
Depending on your age and menstrual cycle, you may get your next period during this time.
If the bleeding is extremely heavy or persistent, you should see your doctor to check for other problems.
I have very heavy periods.
Should I be concerned about cancer?
Heavy bleeding does not usually point to cancer.
However, depending on your age and other risk factors, cancer or pre-cancer should be considered among other causes.
You should visit your gynecologist to determine the cause of your heavy bleeding, and treatment options.
It’s also important to learn about the many non-surgical alternatives to treat heavy periods.
How do I know which birth control pills are right for me?
Your physician will help you choose the right pill for you.
They fall into two main classes: progesterone only, and combined estrogen and progesterone pills.
Birth control pills - What happens if I miss a pill and start bleeding, how long will it last and will I get my period again when I get to the sugar pills?
It is best to set a routine around how you take your birth control pills to avoid missing pills.
If you forget to take a pill at the usual time, take it as soon as you remember.
Depending on what type of pills you are on and where in your cycle you are, spotting or prolonged bleeding may occur.
Call your doctor to discuss how to manage the bleeding and whether you need to use a backup method of birth control.
If your schedule makes it hard to keep up daily pill-taking, you may also want to discuss other types of birth control, such as a vaginal ring or IUD.
Do I have to take the placebo pills or can I start a new pack?
Most birth control pills contain 21 active pills and 7 inactive or reminder pills, also called placebo or sugar pills.
These extra pills serve to keep you in the habit of taking a daily pill during the week you are not taking active pills.
In some formulations, these 7 pills may contain iron or even low doses of estrogen.
If you have the Mirena® inserted & it moves out of place, does that increase risk of pregnancy?
An IUD needs to be properly positioned to be effective.
Expulsion of an IUD is most common in the first 3 months and is usually related to improper placement of the IUD.
Your doctor should teach you how to check for the IUD string to ensure that it is in the right place.
If you cannot feel the string, see your doctor.
If your doctor can't see the strings, the IUD may need to be checked with an ultrasound.
If I am on my period today and the doctor switched me to a new birth control pill today, can I start the new pack today or do I have to wait until next month?
Birth control pills can be started in 3 ways: On the day your period starts, "Sunday start" or the Sunday after your period starts, or "Quick start" on any day of the cycle.
Backup contraception may be needed during the first pack of pills.
The "Quick start" method can be associated with a greater degree of irregular bleeding and may not be as protective during the first cycle.
How soon after I have sex can I take a pregnancy test?
Home pregnancy tests measure the amount of pregnancy hormone in urine.
The test will usually turn positive when the next period would have occurred or about 2 weeks after ovulation.
The time of ovulation differs slightly for every woman and is usually related to the overall length of the cycle.
I’m trying to get pregnant but haven’t so far.
How long should I wait before I see a fertility specialist?
Infertility is generally defined as not conceiving after one year of unprotected intercourse.
If you have been trying for a year or more, you and your partner may benefit from an evaluation.
What is required for the hypertensive patients if they want to keep their pregnancy without any danger?
See your Ob/Gyn for counseling even before you start trying to get pregnant.
Maintain a healthy weight with an appropriate level of exercise and see a nutritionist for tips.
Call your OB as soon as you know that you are pregnant for advice on what medications to stay on and which to stop.
Follow up for all scheduled prenatal appointments and recommended testing.
Talk to your doctor about the warning signs for pre-eclampsia (also known as toxemia), such as headache and visual changes, as well as usual pregnancy concerns such as vaginal bleeding or cramping.
Make sure you know who to contact with questions even after office hours.
I am having horrible hot flashes and wake up in the middle of the night soaked in sweat.
Is there anything I can take for this?
For some women, menopausal symptoms are a minor inconvenience.
For others, continual hot flashes and night sweats lead to sleep deprivation, physical discomfort and social embarrassment.
I’m postmenopausal and began using Prempro 2 months ago.
Last week I started bleeding, like a period, and have very tender breasts.
Is this normal or should I see my doctor?
Will it stop on its own?
These symptoms often occur after initiating hormone therapy and may be related to the strength, formulation or dosing schedule of the hormones you are taking.
Occasionally, vaginal bleeding may be related to other conditions such as benign polyps, pre-cancer or cancer of the uterus or cervix.
Speak with your doctor to discuss if watchful waiting, changing your hormone regimen or further testing is right for you.
What do you recommend for treatment of an ovarian cyst (3 cm) in a 47 yr. old menopausal woman.?
Pain in lower back associated with this cyst.
History of dermoid tumor on left ovary, and mother had ovarian cancer.
Ovarian cysts after menopause commonly cause anxiety for patients.
Multiple factors should be considered to decide if the cyst can be followed with repeat imaging or should be removed surgically: the size and features of the cyst on ultrasound, additional symptoms such as pain, as well as your personal and family history.
Your doctor may order a CA-125 blood test, but this test should not be considered a screening test for ovarian cancer.
See your doctor to discuss your concerns.
Can Premarin cause uterine cancer?
The estrogen contained in hormone therapy promotes growth of the uterine lining.
This can lead to uterine precancer and cancer.
Women who have not had a hysterectomy should take progesterone in addition to estrogen to protect the uterus from too much stimulation.
The progesterone may be taken continuously or for only 2 weeks out of every month.
Can HPV go away if it is left untreated?
Even if it did, can it cause other problems?
Infection with HPV (Human Papilloma Virus) can lead to cervical cancer and pre-cancer and genital warts.
For some women, the immune system will clear HPV within 24 months.
For other women, the virus can persist indefinitely.
Screening for HPV and frequency of pap tests depends on your age, personal health history and risk factors.
Follow up routinely with your doctor for regular pelvic exams and to establish when your next pap test should be done.
Ask your doctor if you are a candidate for the HPV vaccine.
It was a pleasure chatting with all of you.
Thanks for all the great questions!
