Linda Bradley, MDis an internationally recognized gynecologic surgeon known for her expertise in diagnostic and operative hysteroscopy, endometrial ablation, alternatives to hysterectomy, Hysteroscopic sterilization and the evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding.
Welcome everyone, and thank you Dr. Bradley, for being with us to discuss women's health issues.
We look forward to an interesting chat today.
Let's begin with one of the questions.
I go regularly, every year, for my pap test and everything is fine.
My doctor suggested that I have a sonogram, a procedure that inserts into you a camera to check your ovaries.
He said it might show something that doesn't show up in a regular pap.
Is that something you would recommend to have done when no problems are evident?
I would recommend that you follow the instructions for an ultrasound as requested by your physician.
The ultrasound can check for the size of the uterus and the presence of fibroids or ovarian cysts.
At what age can you stop getting PAP tests?
Women should begin PAP tests within 3 years of sexual activity.
If someone is not sexually active, PAP tests should begin by age 21.
The current recommendation for interval screening is an annual PAP test for 3 years.
If negative, the test is done every 3 years.
The cause of cervical cancer is due to the HPV virus.
How can I know if the menstruation pain is because I have tumors or ovarian (cysts)??
Most women have menstrual pain (cramps) with menstrual cycles.
If the pain is not easily relieved with other the counter (OTC) meds like Aleve, Motrin or Tylenol ... or if you are unable to participate in work, travel, hobbies, sports... then you should see your physician.
My daughter is 18 and she has strong pain every month.
The doctor had said she probably has some (cysts) in her ovaries.
Can this be true if she is very young?
Yes.
Beginning with the onset of menstruation until menopause, ovarian cysts are made monthly.
This is normal.
Cysts are usually not cancerous and are small.
When they enlarge more than 5 centimeters doctors may advise birth control pills and a repeat transvaginal ultrasound to determine if the cyst resolves.
Is it normal to experience rectal pain during your menstrual cycle?
This is the only time the pain occurs, and is sharp shooting pain and usually never lasts longer than 10 seconds... it's also more frequent when I need to release bowels.
Rectal pain may be normal however endometriosis can also be the cause of rectal pain during menses.
I am a 36 year old woman.
Due to ovarian cysts, fibroid tumors, excessive bleeding, pain, and troubled pregnancies, I had a hysterectomy back in 2001.
This past weekend, after sex, I experienced pain in the lower abdomen, followed by a dark brown vaginal discharge.
I know this is usually the body cleansing itself of dead blood, but with me having had a hysterectomy, what could this have been?
It has cleared up now, but do I still need to go see a doctor?
It is not normal to have vaginal bleeding after a hysterectomy.
Sometimes bleeding may be due to endometriosis that can still occur after a hysterectomy because you still have your ovaries.
When does menopause typically begin and how do you know you are in menopause?
The definition of menopause is the absence of menstruation for 12 consecutive months.
The average is 51 years; however by age 51 only 80% of women have stopped their periods.
By age 55, 95% of women have stopped their periods.
By age 58, 100% of women should stop menses.
Hi Dr. Bradley, I will be 49 this month and still have regular menstrual cycle.
When will I know I have started menopause?
We answered a similar question at the beginning of the chat.
If you are unable to view the answer, click on the transcript button and it will take you back to the beginning.
Vaginal estrogen did not help painful vaginal dryness.
HRT helps, but I have been on it for 10 years.
Are there any other choices?
There are three ways to take vaginal estrogen (vaginal creams, vaginal rings or vaginal tablets.)
I would recommend switching from whatever product you are currently using to another product.
After having a hysterectomy in 2001, I sometimes experience the same symptoms as before (abdominal pain, swelling, nausea).
If the hysterectomy was done to eliminate the possibility of getting cysts and tumors again, what could be happening to me?
Can they actually come back after a hysterectomy?
A hysterectomy only removes the uterus and cervix.
This is called a partial hysterectomy.
Is Fibromyalgia part of the menopause symptoms??
Some patients during menopause will experience muscle aches and joint stiffness.
Fibromyalgia has many additional symptoms that are unrelated to menopause.
At times, bumps arise on my private areas (vagina, butt, between legs).
They are like abscesses.
They are filled with pus and blood, and are very painful.
They are large in circumference, and don't get any better until they are drained.
What are these bumps called, why are they present, and what can be done about them?
The 'private areas' have oil glands and hair follicles.
Believe it or not, these areas can develop acne.
Very often, these small abscesses are due to inflamed hair follicles or oil glands.
Two years ago I had a breast reduction (Size Double I to B).
They had to remove my nipples and put them back on.
During the healing process, they were black and it was unsure if they would take.
After about 3 weeks they were turning pink.
Now, I am getting a smelly discharge from them.
Is this normal, or does it indicate a problem?
Any discharge from the breast related or even unrelated to surgical procedures should always be evaluated.
Is it normal?
There are very few reasons for having a discharge i.e. recent breast feeding or recent surgery less than six months.
It is recommended to see your doctor for an examination and additional testing.
One week after a spinal, I experienced slight incontinence with coughing.
If nerve was injured or affected, what can be done?
Years later, I now have frequent urinary leakage beginning.
This is most likely a coincidence, but is unrelated.
There are many causes of frequent urination including diabetes, urinary tract infection (UTI), too much caffeine or water.
I have been getting the Depo Provera shots for two years now, and will not be getting another one as my husband and I are going to try to have a baby.
How long does it take for the Depo to get out of my system?
How long before I could conceivably become pregnant?
Depo Provera is an excellent method of birth control.
Usually, the method will be effective for 12-16 weeks.
However, it is not uncommon have the effects on the menstrual cycle for 6 -18 months following the last injection.
We are ready to close the chat for today.
A large number of questions were received and we apologize if we did not get to your question.
If you have additional questions that were not answered, please go towww.clevelandclinic.org/health/livepersonchatto chat online with a health educator.
I am happy to have been involved with this session.
