Linda Bradley, MDis an internationally recognized gynecologic surgeon known for her expertise in diagnostic and operative hysteroscopy, endometrial ablation, alternatives to hysterectomy, hysteroscopic sterilization and the evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding.
What are the current recommendation regarding breast exams?
It is recommended that self breast exam (SBE) begin monthly at age 20 years.
It is best to perform the exam about one week after your menstrual cycle.
If you do not have menstrual cycles, then choose the same time each month to do a breast exam.
What are the current recommendations regarding pelvic exams?
Pelvic exam should be initiated at onset of sexual activity for STD checks.
If not sexually active, at age 21.
Yearly pelvic exams are recommended.
Kegel exercises – is this taught by PT or your doctor or a nurse?
You can teach yourself Kegel’s, it is that easy.
Check the Internet, your nurse or physician for directions.
It does not require a PT.
At what age do you recommend a younger girl start seeing a gynecologist, versus continuing to see their pediatrician?
Most pediatricians will follow their patients until age 21.
Likewise, if there are complaints or gynecologic health issues that the pediatrician cannot address, then a referral to a gynecologist would be made.
Any new contraceptives on the market?
Mirena® (progesterone only intrauterine contraception - IUC) have gained renewed interest by physicians and marketing (commercials.)
It is very safe method of contraception, inserted by a health care professional in the office and provides 5 years of hassle free contraception.
Additional benefits include very light menstrual cycles, decreased menstrual cramps and 99.9% pregnancy avoidance.
It is reversible.
Regarding the new sterilization procedures, how do they work to prevent pregnancy?
Both sterilization procedures block the fallopian tubes.
The Essure® procedure utilizes a metal coil with a matrix embedded that will block the fallopian tube.
Is it common for IUD removal to delay normally-regular cycles?
If so, are there an average number of cycles it takes to return to normal?
There are two types of IUD's currently available.
One is the copper IUD which usually when removed results in regular menstrual cycle.
The progesterone IUD may require 2-3 months before re-establishing normal menses.
However, again, if you are perimenopausal periods may skip.
Also you need to check for pregnancy if your IUD has been removed and your periods have not returned to normal.
Can you get a STD from oral sex?
For instance - if one person has a fever blister?
Or - if a person has an STD, is oral sex still okay?
Yes - STD's may be transmitted orally during oral/anal sex - including GC (gonorrhea), Chlamydia, Herpes and Hepatitis.
If there are blisters or ulcers or any lesions present, you should abstain from this activity.
Can you please talk about the safety of the HPV vaccine?
My daughter (who is 14) has gotten the first shot.
A coworker told me the she didn't want her daughter (who is 12) to have it because of safety reason.
I am now rethinking my decision.
The HPV vaccine represents one of the greatest bench to bedside breakthroughs for women.
Just think about it - we have eradicated Polio, chicken pox, measles, mumps and rubella infections all with a vaccine.
We now know that cervical cancer is caused by a HPV virus.
This vaccination helps prevent cervical cancer.
While there are minor aches, pains, redness in the inoculated area, major safety issues have not been raised.
Is there any relation between chronic cervicitis and HPV?
Chronic cervicitis is a non-specific finding on PAP smears.
If it coexists with a vaginitis (bacterial vaginosis, yeast, trich) then cervicitis may be noted.
However, if there are no vaginal complaints, the HPV virus is not present and there are no cervical lesions then we ignore these findings.
I have had a cone biopsy for dysplasia.
Would that be from HPV?
Most causes of dysplasia are due to the HPV virus.
It is only recently that we have been able to test for the presence of the HPV virus.
If you have had a cone biopsy (or LEEP procedure) then make sure that you get PAP smears regularly as well as HPV testing.
Is there value to testing for HPV in the absence of any clinical findings?
Yes - the current recommendation is to begin HPV testing at age 30 years when the traditional PAP is performed.
HPV is very common.
Approximately 50-70% of women will acquire an HPV infection during her lifetime.
For most women, the virus clears up.
My GYN doctor has mentioned I have some small fibroids but they are not clinically significant.
If they begin to grow or cause problems, what type of symptoms will they cause?
Fibroids are found in 50-80% of women.
Luckily, most women have no symptoms.
Most common symptoms can be change in menstrual bleeding (intensity, quantity & duration), cramps, infertility and cosmetic effects (markedly enlarged abdomen).
And urinary frequency, constipation and pelvic pain.
What are your thoughts Dr. Bradley about switching from conventional HRT meds after 18 years to naturopathic remedy since I have concerns about breast cancer and cardiac risks as per some studies?
Coming off HRT treatment would this mean that my extremely bad symptoms would reappear?
My G.P. told me so, which is also a concern.
I am 64.
Pretty confused at to what to do next.
The current guidelines suggest that symptomatic women consider HRT.
The symptoms that are currently approved by the FDA for treatment include: vaginal dryness, pain with intercourse, hot flashes, night sweats and osteoporosis prevention.
Additionally, treatment with the least amount of hormones for the shortest period of time (5 yrs. or less) is advisable.
My husband says that I snore since I have entered menopause!
I have tried over the counter things & also sleeping on my stomach.
What is available through surgery & how successful is surgery?
I would recommend discussing this with your primary care physician who may advise an ENT or sleep disorders consult.
It is probably coincidental to menopause.
Can a sudden onset of regular mid-cycle spotting (day 11 - 14) be an early sign of perimenopause?
If so, is 38 years old too early to experience it?
Thanks!
Perimenopause can begin in your mid-30's until the cessation of menses at age 51-58.
So that changes you described can be due to perimenopausal changes, but most likely based on the timing you discussed to be mid-cycle ovulation bleeding which is normal.
What to do when you are Perimenopausal--symptoms low sex drive?
Decreased sex drive is normal throughout the seasons of our life.
Most importantly - what is the quality of your relationship with your sexual partner?
Conflicts (financial, in-laws, kids and stress) can and do affect sexual interest.
Also, following traditional sexual habits can become routine and boring.
Great questions.
These questions and answers to many others can be found in the 2nd edition ofThe Cleveland Clinic Guide to Menopauseby Holly Thacker, MD.
