Millions of Americans, from infants to the elderly could be affected by sleep problems and most likely they don’t know it.
How does someone know if they are not getting enough sleep?
There are a variety of signs and symptoms of sleep deprivation.
Some of the easiest to recognize include As a person ages, is it just normal to need more sleep?
When should we be concerned about an older relative?
Advancing age typically leads to changes in sleep patterns that cause older individuals to feel less satisfied with sleep, but are not necessarily indicative of a sleep disorder.
These include more night awakenings and less sleep time overall.
If such changes are accompanied by daytime sleepiness or fatigue, snoring or breathing pauses in sleep, restless leg symptoms or other usual night time behaviors, contact your doctor.
Sleep disorders do tend to increase with age.
There are six main categories of sleep disorders.
To begin with let's talk about them to help those chatting with us understand what they may be experiencing.
What is Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)?
Obstructive sleep apnea is characterized by repetitive episodes of complete (apnea) or partial (hypopnea) upper airway obstruction during sleep.
Often the disorder's first signs are snoring, gasping for breath during sleep and excessive daytime sleepiness.
Is narcolepsy the same thing as daytime sleepiness?
Not exactly .The hallmark of narcolepsy is excessive daytime sleepiness which is characterized by repeated episodes of naps or lapses into sleep during wakefulness.
What about insomnia?
I read in your book a reference to Psychophysiological insomnia.
Psychophysiological insomnia occurs when a patient responds to stress or other environmental conditions with tension.
The individual learns sleep-preventing associations, which result in difficulty falling and staying asleep.
We see many advertisements about Restless Leg Syndrome (RLS).
Can you explain what this is?
RLS is characterized by a strong, often irresistible urge to move the legs.
This may be accompanied by sensations such as tingling, numbness or even pain.
Symptoms usually begin in the evening and are relieved by moving, stretching or rubbing the legs.
The last two categories are something that may or may not be familiar to many people.
What is REM (Rapid Eye Movement) Behavior Disorder (RBD)?
REM Behavior Disorder occurs when the physical paralysis of REM sleep is incomplete or absent.
This condition allows individuals to actually act out their dreams.
And the last category of sleep disorders - can you elaborate on Delayed Sleep-Phase Syndrome (DSPS)?
Let's first talk about Circadian rhythm sleep disorders.
These occur when the normal sleep-wake rhythms are disturbed like when your natural sleep-wake cycles do not conform to society's norm.
This can be due to alterations in the internal body clock - or misalignment between the body's internal rhythms and environmental factors.
How bad should a sleep problem get before someone sees a doctor?
Some sleep problems are directly linked with a life- altering or stressful event, such as a job change or death of a loved one.
Many such cases resolve on their own in weeks to months.
Contact your doctor when sleep complaints are severe and/or longer than a few months in duration.
In many of these cases, the sleep evaluation suggests that the disorder was actually present for much longer, sometimes many years longer, than the patient actually recognized.
Can certain medications cause sleep disorders?
Yes.
Many commonly used prescription and over - the - counter (OTC) medications can cause drowsiness and some can cause insomnia, exacerbate restless legs syndrome or cause other sleep-related problems including sleepwalking and other unusual night time behaviors.
These symptoms are generally reversible once the problematic drug is discontinued.
Herbal remedies can also affect sleep and wakefulness.
My husband goes to bed between midnight and 1am.
He falls asleep reading with the light on, glasses on, sometimes the TV is still on.
I usually wake up and put everything away.
And then between 3-5am he wakes up and reads again in bed.
This cycle has been for almost one year now.
I am sure a lot of it is stress-related and thinking about work in the middle of the night.
He gets plenty of exercise and is otherwise healthy.
Should he try a sleep aid to get over the hump, see a therapist or what?
Do you have any suggestions?
I would recommend that he consult a physician, perhaps a sleep specialist, to determine the type of treatment best suited.
A specialist will interview your husband about his sleep patterns and habits.
Is he having difficulty falling asleep, staying asleep, ruminating about daytime events or is there a physical sensation preventing him from falling asleep and staying asleep?
All of these questions and more will need to be answered in order to determine the best course of action.
If you feel you are suffering from insomnia, should you seek help and get a sleeping pill prescribed?
I am afraid of becoming dependent on the medication.
Millions of Americans are asking the same question.
While sleeping pills can help a person fall asleep more quickly, most patients with chronic insomnia would better be served by learning healthy strategies for getting a restful sleep.
It is true that some of the newer medications advertised on TV are not addictive as was the case with drugs of the past.
But still some people get psychologically addicted to medicine and find themselves shopping between one drug and another.
I generally prescribe sleeping pills for short term use only.
How do I know that what I have is really a sleep disorder?
Do some disorders require sleep testing for diagnosis – and others not?
Yes.
Some disorders are diagnosed by history – the patient interview alone - which is the case in most people with insomnia and RLS.
Others require laboratory testing - either an overnight sleep study called a polysomnogram and/or daytime testing.
Daytime testing is used to diagnose narcolepsy.
What is a sleep history?
Does it involve keeping a sleep diary?
A sleep history generally consists of a series of questions that a physician will ask a patient about their sleep habits and patterns.
A sleep diary or log is something that a person keeps for a period of time and can be a nice complement to the sleep history.
The sleep history can go very far in determining the type of sleep disorder the patient may have.
What does a sleep study -sleep testing in the lab involve?
What is the experience like?
I have Hypersomnia throughout the day.
I have problems in quieter situations, such as working on the computer, in meetings, watching TV, etc., where I am not too active.
I don't necessarily fall asleep, but it's close.
I have to fight to stay awake.
And when it hits, it’s like a curtain coming down.
One minute I am fine, the next I am not.
Luckily, this doesn't occur when I am driving.
What can I do to help this and what exactly causes it?
There can be many different causes of daytime sleepiness, or hypersomnia.
The treatment depends on the underlying cause.
By far the most common cause of daytime sleepiness is inadequate sleep at night.
If there is any possibility that you are not getting enough sleep - the treatment is to extend your sleep time by one hour and see if this helps.
If it does not help, you should be seen by a sleep expert.
A sleep study would be indicated and laboratory testing should be tailored to your sleep history.
This is a textbook example of the normal aging process as it relates to sleep.
With aging - normal older people do not require as much sleep as they did at one time.
There is a shift in the circadian rhythm which causes the individual to fall asleep earlier in the evening, wake up early morning hours.
Sometimes increasing light exposure in the evening helps the individual to fall asleep later in the evening and thus wake up later in the morning hours.
Why do you sometimes experience bad or weird dreams – even nightmares?
This happens to me when I would not expect that I wouldn’t sleep well.
No caffeine or alcohol keeping me up – just really exhausted when I go to sleep.
Nightmares are common disorders, generally benign.
At some level they are probably a reaction to a disturbing memory or event from the recent past.
They do not necessarily occur in a logical fashion.
Nevertheless - they are almost always harmless..
I seem to have dreamless sleep.
I can't remember the last dream I have had; it’s been that long ago.
Can you explain this?
Not everyone remembers their dreams.
Simply not remembering does not mean that you are not dreaming and achieving deep stages of sleep.
If you have other sleep symptoms such as snoring or daytime sleepiness - there may be more to it.
There are some nights where it seems I do nothing but dream.
I wake up constantly, go right back to sleep, but back into another dream.
I wake up feeling terrible.
I don't really like taking sleeping pills because I'm afraid I won't get up on time in the morning.
What can I do to help with this?
If excessive dreaming that is disturbing and disruptive is the norm - you should be evaluated by a sleep expert.
Symptoms such as these may be a sign of narcolepsy, sleep deprivation or alcohol overuse and withdrawal.
Please address snoring issues and available treatment options.
Is there any product available to help reduce snoring?
Snoring is quite common and must be differentiated from sleep apnea.
Sleep apnea presents with snoring and periods of breathing cessation in sleep.
Typically a sleep study is needed to diagnosis sleep apnea.
This has been a great venue to answer questions.
Here’s to a good night’s sleep for everyone.
Sweet dreams!
Remember, you don't need to suffer with poor quality sleep or daytime sleepiness.
The first step toward a better night's sleep is a comprehensive evaluation by a Cleveland Clinic Sleep Disorders specialist.
To make an appointment call 216.444.2165 or toll free 800.223.2273, ext.
42165, from 8 am to 5 pm.Learn more If you are looking for a Sleep Center and your physician recommends testing in the sleep laboratory for your convenience and comfort, you can have your sleep study performed at any of the Cleveland Clinic Sleep Laboratories located throughout the region
