Mitochondrial disorders can affect organs, motor function and the nervous system.
Individuals experience a wide array of symptoms and degrees of severity.
Although commonly seen in infants and children this chronic and genetic disease can develop at any age.
Diagnosis of this disease can be difficult.
Cleveland Clinic Pediatric Neurology is ranked in the top 4 in the country with many of its physicians specializing in the research and treatment of mitochondrial disease.
When a mitochondrial disease presents in an adult, does that mean that person had the problem their whole life, or that it just developed?It depends.
We differentiate between primary (genetic/born-with) mitochondrial disease and secondary mitochondrial dysfunction.
What differences are there, if any, between the way a mitochondrial disorder presents itself in a child versus an adult?As stated in the prior entry - mitochondrial disorders present differently depending on how severely they are affected.
Also - each organ in our body has different pools of mitochondria - and each pool of mitochondria can have varied levels of health as well.
Does mitochondrial disease worsen / progress with time, or can it improve?As one of the previous replies may have alluded to - since there are many types of mitochondrial diseases of varying severity - the answer to your question is that it can do any of these things.
Is there a direct link between life expectancy and the type of mutation present?As some of you may be picking up - there is no yes/no answer for mitochondrial disease.
For life expectancy and mutations, the answer is that it depends on the type of mutation and how many of the 'gazillions' of mitochondria are affected (which we can sometimes quantify when the mutation is known).
How often do you see mitochondrial disease affecting the immune system?This topic is still actively being studied.
We know that mitochondrial dysfunction leads to more chronic non-life-threatening infections (colds, ear-infections) - and in some patients - having these medical stressors recur frequently leads to a decrease in quality of life.
Are Type 1 Fiber Predominance and irregular size muscles fibers the same thing?No.
My 4 year old daughter has severe diarrhea from the medications she is taking.
What can I give her to help with this?I would defer this question to a gastroenterologist.
If the diarrhea is due to supplements (carnitine), lowering the dose and giving it over more intervals (3-4 times a day) and ensuring that you give it with food may help.
My grandson was recently diagnosed with Complex III Mito Disorder.
What is the difference between Type I, II III, IV, V or whatever?
Does the higher number mean it is worse?
Can a person have more than one?The various numbers refer to the various portions (departments) in the mitochondria.
A higher number is not worse - it just helps physicians know which part of the mitochondria might not be working well and direct genetic testing.
I have NARP (Neuropathy, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) syndrome) and associated muscle pain in my legs.
I also have joint pain in one knee.
Is this related?Mitochondrial disorders typically do not cause joint injury - though muscle disorders lead to more stress on joints and can exacerbate or bring out a 'minor' joint problem that comes about with 'normal' aging.
I am 48 and was diagnoses with MERRF syndrome (Myoclonus Epilepsy Associated with Ragged-Red Fibers) about 10 years ago, that has been getting progressively worse.
I get fatty tumors that have to be removed surgically.
Are these tumors related to the MERRF and is there any way to try and prevent their growth?Fatty tumors (lipomas) can be seen more commonly in certain mitochondrial disorders.
There is no way to prevent these.
Can you give me any insight into CPEO, such as progression and treatment?
Thanks.CPEO - chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia - can vary in severity and progression (as can all mitochondrial disorders).
The treatment for most mitochondrial disorders is similar -maintaining good health and nutrition, avoiding mitochondrial toxins and considering anti-oxidant supplementation.
Is Diffuse Louis Body Disease a form of mitochondrial disease or dysfunction?Likely leads to secondary mitochondrial dysfunction How common are misdiagnosis of mitochondrial diseases because they are fairly rare?
How would this affect the patient in terms of their treatment?This is a difficult question to answer.
It seems that mitochondrial disorders are not that rare - but we have had difficulty in diagnosing them.
Also, the path to diagnosis is complex in that it requires many tests and there is no 'one' test that makes the diagnosis, but rather a person reviewing and interpreting the entire medical picture, or 'clinical story' and lab test results.
I have progressive autonomic neuropathy.
My doctors have recently been considering doing a muscle biopsy to check for mitochondrial disease.
However, they say that even if the test results come back positive for mitochondrial disease, there may be no change in treatment.
If so, is it advisable to get the biopsy done?The muscle biopsy is a stepping-stone to diagnosis.
A piece of muscle can get sent for a few or several hundred tests - and it is important to ensure that if mitochondrial testing is being done on muscle, all of the testing is done on it.
Is it possible to have different results to muscle biopsies done at different times and by different labs?YES.
This is unfortunately one of the challenges of the field.
A piece of muscle, once obtained, can be handled very differently.
In addition - each lab often has varied ways of running the testing.
My child was diagnosed with autism.
Would you recommend having him tested for a mitochondrial disease?
What is the exact correlation between the two?Most patients who have autism have a genetic non-mitochondrial etiology for their symptoms.
What are some of the symptoms that would present themselves that doctors might suspect a mitochondrial disease?This is a very broad question.
I will direct you to the Mitochondrial Medicine Society website (www.mitosoc.org), ‘Toolkit’ section, in-case you would like to read more.
Is it common for someone with a mitochondrial disorder to show no outward sign that the disorder exists?Yes.
For a Complex I defect, what do you recommend for pain?
My son’s pain varies from day to day as to what hurts and severity.Sadly, our approach to mitochondrial symptoms is the same whether or not someone has mitochondrial disease.
Thus, a pain management expert should be able to help - even if they are not familiar with mitochondrial disease.
They only need to make sure they do not use medications that have potential mitochondrial toxicity.
Can mitochondrial disease cause behavioral problems in my child?Possibly.
We know that mitochondrial disorders can cause or worsen anxiety, depression, bipolar disease, and autism symptoms.
When damage to the brain occurs with a mitochondrial disease, is the brain permanently damaged?Sometimes :) It depends on how severe the brain injury is.
We have had patients have some or complete recovery while others have not.
Is there a link between mitochondrial disease and crystals found in urine analysis?
I read that when muscles break down during an illness / regression that crystals in the urine are an indication.
Is that true?There are MANY causes of crystals in the urine - most being less esoteric than mitochondrial disease.
The most common is calcium not being processed in the kidneys properly.
Is there a complete list somewhere that tells us what medications, IV fluids, anesthetics to avoid because of damage caused to mito?There is a list of both medications that are used for treatment and ones to avoid available in a Mitochondrial Medicine Society (www.mitosoc.org) paper, published in 2009, called the Modern Treatment of Mitochondrial Disease.
More information can be found at the MMS website under the ‘Toolkit’ section.
Could statins cause memory loss or muscle atrophy and are there any treatments?Statins - medications used to treat elevated cholesterol levels - interfere with CoQ10 synthesis.
CoQ10 is crucial to mitochondrial function.
For mitochondrial disease treatment, the levels of vitamins and minerals taken are very high.
How does the doctor know when it is too high and instead of helping the body is actually toxic to the body?We typically follow blood levels of carnitine and leukocyte (white blood cell) levels of CoQ10 when utilizing high doses of these medications.
I know there are different levels of absorption rates in different medications (CoQ10 for example) is there a specific thing to look for to tell what brand or type is best?
My son was on a brand from Integrative Therapeutics but it is no longer available.There is a lot of debate about this - but Tishcon Corp. has obtained FDA approval for mitochondrial disease because their products have been shown to be bioavailable (available inside the cells) to the FDA's standards.
I have mitochondrial myopathy.
Can massage help with symptoms, or can it hurt?As a whole - light or therapeutic massage is not harmful.
Heavy or deep massage can lead to problems in some patients who turn over or injure their muscle too easily (they typically have elevated blood CPK levels - a marker of muscle turnover).
I have read somewhere that mito patients should not use aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Is this true and if so, which antibiotics are these?We do try and avoid aminoglycoside antibiotics in patients with known mitochondrial disease.
There is a large list of these and your physician(s) should know what these are, though some of them end in -mycin.
My physician has increased my dosage of Lipitor® to 20mg daily M-F and 40mg on weekends for increased triglyceride levels, 300 from 246 in 3 months.
I am concerned about memory loss.
My total cholesterol levels are within normal levels.
Should I be concerned about the increased dosage?We do not suspect statins of causing memory loss in metabolic patients.
What are the genetics associated with Mitochondrial Disease?
My father had it, I have it and my son has it.
If I have more children, will they all have it?
How about their children?
Does it depend on the disorder or the severity?This is a very broad question that can have a very long answer.
If the son of a mother with mitochondrial disease shows symptoms at birth, it is most likely Primary (genetic) mitochondrial disease?
If a daughter of the same mother also shows symptoms (but at age 7) does that mean the father must also have a genetic mutation linked to mitochondrial disease?
What type of blood tests would help identify those genes?It turns out that even in families with the same DNA mutation impairing mitochondrial function (maternally inherited mitochondrial DNA mutations OR nuclear DNA mutations from either mom or dad), each family member may have relatively different symptoms, vastly different severity of symptoms and different ages of onset.
Through my reading, it seems that most of these disorders are passed on through the mother.
Is this true?There is an earlier posting from today that briefly reviews the genetics of mitochondrial disease.
What difference does genetic testing make when planning for children?
Are there some disorders that doctors would recommend not having children?
Are there some disorders that can be "fixed" before a child is born if detected in-vitro?The value of a genetic (DNA) diagnosis is so that the geneticist can discuss with you prognosis (less so for mitochondrial diseases), provide proper preventative care, and guide you as to what the recurrence risk is of this problem happening in any children you have.
This may lead to pre-pregnancy or pregnancy related testing.
I have heard and read that immunizations can be harmful to children with mito disorders.
My pediatrician still wants my child to have them.
I am undecided.
What are your thoughts?There is no clear evidence that immunizations themselves hurt mitochondrial or metabolic patients.
Is there an association between Chronic Fatigue and Mitochondrial Diseases?The diagnosis of 'chronic fatigue syndrome' is an evolving one.
It was recently found that some of these patients may have an underlying retro-viral infection - though more research is still needed to better determine whether this is true.
